Title: 2606.23066v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.23066v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:54:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 59

Markdown Content:
Page 1 of 59 

Title: 

Estimati ng common synaptic inputs to spinal motor neurons from motor unit spike trains using 

openhdemg 

Authors: 

Hélio V. Cabral 1,2,3 ,* , Giacomo Valli 4,* , R oberto Zanotti 4, Ioannis Delis 5, Francesco Negro 4

> *Co -first authors, as these authors contributed equally to this work.

Affiliations: 

> 1

School of Physical Education and Sports, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 

Janeiro, Brazil 

> 2

Biomedical Engineering Program  (COPPE) , Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 

Janeiro, Brazil 

> 3

Postgraduate Program in Rehabilitation Sciences, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

> 4

Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Università di Brescia, Brescia, Italy 

> 5

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens ,

Athens, Gree ce

Acknowledgements: 

Funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are, however, those of the 

author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European 

Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting a uthority 

can be held responsible for them. European Research Council Consolidator Grant 

INcEPTION n. 101045605 (F.N.). 

Corresponding author: 

Prof. Francesco Negro 

Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences 

Università di Brescia 

Viale Europa 11, Brescia, 2512 3, Italy 

E-mail : francesco.negro@unibs.it Page 2 of 59 

Abstract 

Common synaptic input is considered a fundamental principle of motor neuron control and represents 

the dominant component of the neural drive transmitted from the motor neuron pool to muscle. Recent 

advances in High -Density surface Electromyography (HDsEMG) and motor unit (MU) 

decomposition algorithms have enabled the concurrent identification of increasingly large 

populations of MUs and substantially expanded the possibility of estimating common synaptic input 

from MU spike trains, making this approach wid ely used to investigate the neural control of 

movement in humans . However, multiple analytical approaches are currently available, each relying 

on different physiological assumptions, mathematical formulations, and parameter choices. 

Furthermore, the lack of practical guidelines and open -source implementations has limi ted the 

accessibility and reproducibility of these analyses. In this tutorial, we provide a practical ,

physiologically grounded guide to estimating common synaptic input from populations of MU spike 

trains using openhdemg, an open -source Python framework . We organize the available methods into 

three complementary categories: time -domain approaches applied to smoothed discharge rates, 

frequency -domain approaches based on coherence between cumulative spike trains, and a network -

information approach based on nonlinear pairwise dependencies and graph theory. For each method, 

we describe its physiological interpretation, step -by -step estimation , and systematically examine how 

key parameter choices in fluence the resulting estimate s, provid ing practical recommendations for 

their selection. Finally, we present a complete workflow from HDsEMG decomposition and MU 

cleaning to common synaptic input estimation, demonstrating that decomposition quality directly 

affects these estimates. This tutorial provides an accessible and reproducible framework for 

investigating common synaptic input from MU populations. 

Keywords : motor unit s; blind source separation; HDsEMG decomposition; neural drive; common 

input ; open -source ; motor control Page 3 of 59 

1. Introduction 

Voluntary movement arises from the ability of the central nervous system to transform neural 

commands into coordinated muscle activation and, ultimately, muscle force production (Heckman 

and Enoka, 2012, Enoka and Farina, 2021) . This transformation involves multiple interacting neural 

processes from descending, spinal, and sensory pathways that converge onto the alpha motor neuron 

pool , whose binary spike train output determines the neural command delivered to the active muscle 

(Ishizuka et al., 1979, Lemon, 2008, Duchateau and Enoka, 2011) . In this sense , alpha motor neurons 

and the muscle fibers they innervate (i.e., motor units ; MUs ), represent the final integrative stage of 

the motor pathway through which synaptic inputs are transduced into muscle force (Liddell and 

Sherrington, 1925, Sherrington, 1925) . The neural signal received by the muscle can then be 

approximated by the cumulative spike train, defined as the sum of the spike trains of the active MUs, 

and commonly referred to as the neural drive to the muscle (Farina and Negro, 2015) .

The synaptic inputs integrated by alpha motor neurons include both common inputs, which are shared 

across motor neurons, and independent inputs, which differ across motor neurons. Because common 

inputs modulate the membrane potentials of multiple motor neu rons simultaneously, they are 

enhanced in the neural drive to the muscle through a population averaging process, whereas 

independent inputs tend to be attenuated (Farina and Negro, 2015, Hug et al., 2023a) . Accordingly, 

compelling evidence from both computational simulations and experimental studies ha s demonstrated 

that the motor neuron pool functions as a highly selective spatial filter, preserving synaptic inputs that 

are common to multiple motor neurons while reducing the influence of independent inputs (Negro et 

al., 2009, Negro and Farina, 2011b, Farina et al., 2014, Negro et al., 2016b) . Together with the 

intrinsic low -pass filtering properties of muscle (Bawa and Stein, 1976, Baldissera et al., 1998, Cabral 

et al., 2024b) , these findings indicate that the force output is primarily driven by the low -frequency 

components of synaptic input that are widely shared across the motor neuron pool . Collectively, t hese 

observations support the view that MU activity is primarily driven by low -dimensional neural control, Page 4 of 59 

with common synaptic input emerging as a central determinant of muscle force generation (Negro et 

al., 2009, Farina et al., 2014, Laine et al., 2015, Madarshahian et al., 2021, Del Vecchio et al., 2019, 

Del Vecchio et al., 2023, Levine et al., 2023, Rossato et al., 2024, Hug et al., 2023b, Dernoncourt et 

al., 2025) .

An important consequence of common synaptic input being a major determinant of motor neuron 

output is that the discharge times of concurrently active MU s are not independent (Adrian and Bronk, 

1928) . Instead, MU s tend to exhibit coupled discharge behaviors, resulting in some degree of 

coupling s among their outputs (Sears and Stagg, 1976, Datta and Stephens, 1990, Bremner et al., 

1991, Nordstrom et al., 1992, De Luca et al., 1982, Mori, 1975) . This phenomenon has motivated the 

use of correlation -based analyses between MU discharge times to infer the amount and structure of 

common input received by the motor neuron pool (Kirkwood, 1979) . Since the 19 70s, several 

measures have been proposed to quantify these relations in the time and frequency domains, including 

common drive index (De Luca et al., 1982, De Luca and Erim, 1994) , short -term synchronization 

(Kirkwood and Sears, 1978, Nordstrom et al., 1992, McIsaac and Fuglevand, 2008, Farmer et al., 

1993) , and coherence analyses (Rosenberg et al., 1998, Farmer et al., 1993, Amjad et al., 1997, 

Rosenberg et al., 1989) . Most early applications of these methods were based on pairwise analyses 

of MU s, which were justified by the relatively small number of MU s (~1 -2) that could be identified 

concurrently during voluntary contractions using intramuscular wire or quadrifilar electrodes (Adrian 

and Bronk, 1928, Bigland and Lippold, 1954, De Luca and Forrest, 1972) . Although pairwise 

analyses provided important physiological insights, they are intrinsically limited by the influence of 

motor neuron sampling properties on correlation estimates (de la Rocha et al., 2007, Lazar and 

Pnevmatikakis, 2008, Negro and Farina, 2012) .

Building on pioneering work from the 19 80s using multichannel electromyography (Masuda et al., 

1983, Masuda et al., 1985, Reucher et al., 1987) , advances in high -density electromyography and MU Page 5 of 59 

decomposition algorithms over the last decades (Merletti et al., 1999, Holobar and Zazula, 2007b, 

Ning et al., 2015, Muceli et al., 2015, Negro et al., 2016a, Chen and Zhou, 2016, Muceli et al., 2022) 

have enabled the identification of large populations of concurrently active MU s during voluntary 

contractions. This technological advance has substantially changed the way common synaptic input 

can be investigated (Farina et al., 2016) . Rather than relying exclusively on pairs of MU s, the 

concurrent analysis of multiple MU spike trains can improve the estimation of shared inputs , because 

it increases the average sampling rate of the common input to alpha motor neurons (Negro and Farina, 

2011a, Negro and Farina, 2011b) . This principle underlies the use of cumulative spike trains and 

pooled estimates of coherence (Negro et al., 2016b, Del Vecchio et al., 2019, Maillet et al., 2022, 

Rossato et al., 2022, Cabral et al., 2024a, Cabral et al., 2024b, Cabral et al., 2025a) , as well as 

dimensionality -reduction (Negro et al., 2009, Del Vecchio et al., 2023, Rossato et al., 2024, 

Dernoncourt et al., 2025, Cabral et al., 2025b) and , more recently, network -based approaches applied 

to MU discharge patterns (Hug et al., 2023b, Cabral et al., 2025b) . Therefore, the availability of larger 

MU samples has not only improved the robustness of common input estimates but has also expanded 

the analytical framework from pairwise correlation to population -level estimates .

Several methods are currently available to estimate common synaptic input from MU spike trains, 

and each method provides a different physiological and mathematical representation of the shared 

input to the motor neuron pool. Time -domain approaches quantify shared fluctuations in smoothed 

discharge rates (De Luca et al., 1982, Negro et al., 2009, Del Vecchio et al., 2023, Rossato et al., 

2024, Cabral et al., 2025b) , frequency -domain approaches identify the spectral content of common 

input (Negro and Farina, 2012, Negro et al., 2016b) , and more recent network -information theoretic 

approaches capture nonlinear dependencies among MU outputs (O'Reilly and Delis, 2024, O'Reilly 

and Delis, 2022, Cabral et al., 2025b) . However, these methods are sensitive to several parameter 

selections , such as the duration of the smoothing window for time -domain approaches , the length and 

overlap of the analysis windows for frequency -domain approaches , and the number of MU s included Page 6 of 59 

in the analysis . These parameter choices can substantially influence the resulting estimates and, in 

some cases, lead to different physiological interpretations (Negro and Farina, 2012) . Although 

tutorials and practical guidelines have been published for estimating MU discharge properties and 

analyzing central and peripheral MU features (Del Vecchio et al., 2020, Valli et al., 2024, Lecce et 

al., 2026) , practical guidance on estimating common synaptic input from MU spike trains remains 

limited. Moreover, the absence of open -source implementations has often required researchers to rely 

on specialized knowledge in signal processing and advanced coding, which may limit the accessibility 

and reproducibility of this type of analysis across laboratories. 

The purpose of this paper is to provide a practical and physiological guide for estimating common 

synaptic input from populations of MU spike trains using openhdemg (Valli et al., 2024) 

(https://www.giacomovalli.com/openhdemg/ ), an open -source framework written in Python 3

(Python Software Foundation, USA). We organize the se approaches into three complementary 

categories according to the representation of MU activity used to estimate common synaptic input: 

(1) time -domain approaches applied to smoothed discharge rates, including the common drive index 

and principal component analysis (Section 3 ); (2) frequency -domain approaches based on coherence 

between cumulative spike trains, including pooled coherence and the proportion of common input 

index (Section 4 ); and (3) a network -information approach based on nonl inear pairwise dependencies 

and graph theory (Section 5 ). For each approach, we describe the physiological interpretation, the 

step -by -step estimation, and how key parameter choices affect the estimates, and provide practical 

recommendations for parameter selection. The supplementary material available at 

https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.32751243  complements these sections by providing 

implementation examples of openhdemg , including the main function calls and arguments required 

to reproduce each analysis . Fi nally, we present the complete workflow from HDsEMG decomposition 

to MU cleaning and common synaptic input estimation (Section 6 ), which can be performed within 

the openhdemg framework via an integrated, flexible Python -based interface . In particular, we discuss Page 7 of 59 

the effect of MU cleaning on the estimation of common synaptic input and demonstrate that the 

presence of a few poorly edited MUs within larger pools can alter these estimates. 

2. Datasets used in this tutorial 

To illustrate the implementation and parameter sensitivity of each approach, we used decomposed 

HDsEMG recordings from individual participants included in previously published studies. For the 

common drive index and pooled coherence analyses, we used HDsEMG signals recorded from the 

vastus lateralis of one participant from Cosentino et al. (2026) . In that experiment, the participant 

performed an isometric knee extension learning task in which the target force was a randomly 

generated signal low -pass filtered at 1.5 Hz. The target oscillated around a force level corresponding 

to 10% of maximal volu ntary contraction, and each trial lasted 30 s. The data used in the present 

tutorial were obtained from one of the last 15 trials, after the participant had learned the task. For the 

principal component analysis of smoothed discharge rates and the network -information framework, 

we used data from another participant included in Cabral et al. (2025b) . In this dataset, HDsEMG 

signals were recorded from the tibialis anterior while the participant performed isometric dorsiflexion 

contractions at 10% of maximal voluntary contraction . The task followed a similar structure to that 

described for the vastus lateralis dataset, with the participant tracking a randomly generated force 

target. Finally, for the proportion of common input index and for the analysis of how MU cleaning 

affects estimates of common synaptic input, we used data from one participant inclu ded in Cabral et 

al. (2024b) . In that experiment, the participant performed an isometric dorsiflexion task at 10% of 

maximal voluntary contraction for 40 s, with the ankle positioned at 130°. Together, these datasets 

were selected to provide representative examples of decomposed MU spike trains from different 

muscles, contraction tasks, and analysis scenarios within the openhdemg framework. 

The final MU yield was 18 MU s for the vastus lateralis dataset used for the common drive index and 

pooled coherence analyses , 21 MU s for the tibialis anterior dataset used for the principal component Page 8 of 59 

analysis and network -information framework, and 31 MU s for the tibialis anterior dataset used for 

the proportion of common input index and for the analyses presented in Section 6 . The only required 

input for all functions used to estimate common synaptic input is the emgfile , which is the Python 

object containing the information from the decomposed HDsEMG file and represents the basic data 

structure of the openhdemg framework. This object includes, among other variables, the binary MU 

spike trains, the samp ling frequency, and the number of identified MU s. Therefore, starting from the 

binary spike trains contained in the emgfile , the functions automatically perform the main processing 

steps described in the following sections. Further details about the openhdemg data structure are 

available at  https://www.giacomovalli.com/openhdemg/tutorials/emgfile_structure/ .

3. Time -domain approaches 

3.1. Common drive index 

3.1.1. Physiological interpretation 

The common drive index quantifies the extent to which the discharge rates of MU s share low -

frequency fluctuations over time. These shared fluctuations are assumed to reflect low -frequency 

common synaptic input to the motor neuron pool, commonly termed common drive (De Luca et al., 

1982, De Luca and Erim, 1994) . The method is based on pairwise cross -correlation analysis of MU 

discharge rates, with the common drive index typically defined as the average cross -correlation across 

all MU pairs. This approach was initially applied to MU s recorded from the deltoid and first dorsal 

interosseous muscles (De Luca et al., 1982) and continues to be widely used in the MU literature 

(Hug et al., 2023b, Levine et al., 2023, Maillet et al., 2022) . However, although the common drive 

index provides a useful estimate of shared low -frequency modulation among MU s, it is important to 

recognize that the strength of common synaptic input received by a pair of motor neurons is not 

necessarily proportional to the degree of correlation between their output spike trains (de la Rocha et 

al., 2007, Negro and Farina, 2012, Rodriguez -Falces et al., 2017) . Therefore, even though the 

common drive index can be also interpreted as a population -level estimate because it averages cross -Page 9 of 59 

correlations across all possible MU pairs, recent studies have adopted a more conservative 

interpretation by focusing on the proportion of MU pairs whose cross -correlation values exceed a 

statistical confidence threshold (Hug et al., 2023b, Levine et al., 2023, Maillet et al., 2022) .

3.1.2. Step -by -step estimation 

The first step in estimating the common drive index is to obtain the smoothed discharge rate of each 

MU from its binary spike train (Figure 1A ). Let  𝑥 𝑖 (𝑡 ) denote the binary spike train of the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ MU ,

where  𝑥 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 1 when the MU discharges and  𝑥 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 0 otherwise. T he smoothed discharge rates 

𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) is classically obtained by convol ving  𝑥 𝑖 (𝑡 ) with a smoothing window  𝑤 (𝑡 ):

𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝑥 𝑖 (𝑡 ) ∗ 𝑤 (𝑡 ) = ∫ 𝑥 𝑖 (𝜏 )𝑤 (𝑡 − 𝜏 )𝑑𝜏 

> +∞
> −∞

(1)

The smoothing kernel typically used for this purpose is a 0. 4-s Hanning window (De Luca et al., 

1982) , which corresponds to low -pass filtering the MU discharge rate at ~ 1.8 Hz (Negro et al., 2009) .

This operation emphasizes slow fluctuations in MU discharge rates and attenuates higher -frequency 

fluctuations, thereby isolating the low -frequency oscillations assumed to reflect common drive .

Because convolution and subsequent filtering can introduce edge artifacts, a portion of the signal at 

the beginning and end of the smoothed discharge rates can be removed before further analysis, for 

example 1 s at each edge . Subsequently, a zero -phase high -pass filter with a cut -off frequency of 0.75 

Hz is applied to remove offsets and slow trends from the smoothed discharge rates in the smoothed 

discharge rates (De Luca et al., 1982) , resulting in the detrended smoothed discharge rates shown in 

Figure 1 B.Page 10 of 59 

The next step is to quantify the similarity between the smoothed discharge rates of each pair of MU s. 

For the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ and  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ MU s, t he normalized cross -correlation  𝜌 𝑖𝑗  is calculated as a function of a time lag 

𝜏 :

𝜌 𝑖𝑗 (𝜏 ) = 𝛾 𝑖𝑗 (𝜏 )

√𝛾 𝑖𝑖 (0)𝛾 𝑗𝑗 (0) (2)

where  𝛾 𝑖𝑗 (𝜏 ) is the cross -covariance between  𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 𝑗 (𝑡 ) at a lag  𝜏 , 𝛾 𝑖𝑖 (0) and  𝛾 𝑗𝑗 (0) are the 

zero -lag auto -variances of  𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 𝑗 (𝑡 ), respectively . This normalization constrains the cross -

correlation values between -1 and 1, allowing the strength of the association between MU discharge 

rate fluctuations to be compared across pairs. The cross -correlation functions obtained for all MU 

pairs are shown as gray lines in Figure 1C . From each cross -correlation function, the peak correlation 

value within a physiological lag range (typically ± 0. 1 s; De Luca et al. (1982) ) is extracted and used 

as the pairwise estimate of common drive. These pairwise peak correlation values can then be 

arranged into a correlation matrix of  𝑁 𝑥 𝑁  MU s (Figure 1 D). The normalized cross -correlation can 

be calculated using the entire smoothed discharge rate signal or after segmenting the signal into 

shorter time windows, for example 5 -s windows (Negro et al., 2009) . When windowed analysis is 

used, the peak cross -correlation is first extracted for each MU pair within each time window and then 

averaged across windows to obtain a single pairwise correlation value. Finally, the common drive 

index is computed as the average of the pairwise peak correlation values across all possible MU pairs. 

Therefore, the common drive index provides a summary measure of the extent to which the 

population of MU s exhibits low -frequency fluctuations in discharge rate s over time. Page 11 of 59     

> Figure 1: Step -by -step estimation of the common drive index from motor unit spike trains. (A) Motor unit spike trains obtained from
> decomposed high -density surface electromyography (HDsEMG) signals. (B) Smoothed discharge rates obtained by convolving the
> motor unit spike trains with a 0.4 -s Hanning window, followed by detrending using a zero -phase high -pass filter with a cutoff frequency
> of 0.75 Hz. (C) Normalized cross -correlation functions calculated for all possible motor unit pair combinations using the detrend ed
> smoothed discharge rates shown in panel B. Peak cross -correlation values were extracted within a lag window of ± 0.1 s (vertical
> dashed lines). (D) Pairwise correlation matrix constructed from the peak cross -correlation values of all motor unit pairs. In this
> example, the matrix has dimensions of 18 × 18 motor units. The common drive index is calculated as the averag e of the peak cross -
> correlation values across all motor unit pairs. The color scale represents the strength of the correlation between motor unit pairs.

3.1. 3. Statistical significance 

A statistical confidence level can be calculated to determine whether the peak cross -correlation values 

observed between MU pairs exceed the level expected by chance. In recent studies, this has typically 

been achieved using surrogate spike trains generated by randomly shuffling the interspike intervals 

of the original MU discharge times (Hug et al., 2023b, Levine et al., 2023, Maillet et al., 2022) . This 

procedure preserves the discharge statistics of each MU (e.g., the number of discharges and the 

interspike interval distribution ), while disrupting the temporal relationship between MU s and 

therefore reducing the correlations expected from common synaptic input. After generating the 

surrogate spike trains, the same processing pipeline applied to the original data is repeated. 

Specifically, surrogate spike trains are converted into smoothed discharge rates, edge portions 

affected by convolution and fi ltering are removed, the signals are detrended, and pairwise normalized 

cross -correlations are calculated using the same analysis windows and lag range described in the 

previous section. When two surrogate versions are generated for each MU , each real MU pair can be 

compared with four possible combinations of surrogate spike trains. These surrogate repetitions are 

then used to build a null distribution of peak cross -correlation values expected in the absence of 

temporal coupling between MU s. The confidence level is then defined as a high percentile of this Page 12 of 59 

surrogate distribution, commonly the 95 th or 99 th percentile. Pairwise peak cross -correlation values 

from the original MU spike trains that exceed this confidence level are considered statistically 

significant . This approach for calculating the confidence level of the pairwise cross -correlation values 

is the one implemented in openhdemg .

3.1. 4. Parameter sensitivity and recommendations 

The estimation of the common drive index is implemented in openhdemg through the function 

common_drive_index , with the main structure described in Supplementary Material. We

systematically tested how three main parameters affected the estimates (Figure 2 ): the duration of 

the time windows used to segment the smoothed discharge rates for cross -correlation analysis, the 

duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the binary spike trains, and the overlap between 

consecutive windows used for cross -correlatio n analysis.           

> Figure 2: Parameter sensitivity of the common drive index. The common drive index was estimated from detrended smoothed motor
> unit discharge rates using pairwise normalized cross -correlation analysis. Panels A –C show the effect of changing the duration of the
> time windows used to segment the smoothed discharge rates for cross -correlation analysis: 5 -s windows (A), 10 -s windows (B), and
> the entire signal (C). Increasing the duration of the cross -correlation window reduced the estimated common drive index, indicating
> that shorter windows are more sensitive to local periods of shared discharge -rate modulation. Panels D–F show the effect of changing Page 13 of 59
> the duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the binary spike trains: 0.15 s (D), 0.4 s (E), and 1 s (F). Longer smoothi ng
> windows increased the common drive index by attenuating high -frequency discharge variability and emphasizing slower fluctuations
> shared across motor units, although this progressively restricts the analysis to lower -frequency components of motor unit discharge
> rates. Panels G –I show the effect of changing the overlap between consecutive cross -correlation windows while using 10 -s wi ndows:
> 0 s overlap (G), 4 s overlap (H), and 8 s overlap (I). Increasing the overlap produced modestly higher and smoother estimates of
> common drive, but adjacent overlapping windows are not statistically independent. In each panel, the correlation matrix represents
> the pairwise peak cross -correlation values between motor units, with higher values (red) indicating stronger shared low -frequency
> modulation.

First, we tested the effect of the duration of the cross -correlation window by segmenting the smoothed 

MU discharge rate s into 5 -s windows ( Figure 2A ), 10 -s windows ( Figure 2B ), or by using the entire 

signal for the cross -correlation analysis ( Figure 2C ). Increasing the duration of the cross -correlation 

window progressively reduced the estimated common drive index, as reflected by the lower pairwise 

correlation values in the MU correlation matrix (note that there are more blue colors from Figure 2A 

to Figur e 2 C). Note also that , in the example shown , the common drive index decreased from 0.5 8 ±

0.1 8 for the 5 -s window segmentation to 0.5 3 ± 0.19 for the entire signal . Given the inherent non -

stationarity of MU discharge rates, shorter analysis windows improve the temporal resolution need ed 

to capture time -varying adjustments in common fluctuations . Furthermore, t he slight reduction in 

standard deviation observed with the 5 -s windows suggests that segmentation provides a more stable, 

localized profile of MU behavior .

Second, we tested the effect of the duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the binary spike 

trains. We systematically compared smoothing windows of 0.15 s ( Figure 1D ), 0.4 s ( Figure 1E ), 

and 1 s ( Figure 1F ), which are approximately equivalent to low -pass filtering the MU discharge rates 

with -3 dB cutoff frequencies of ~4.8 Hz, ~1.8 Hz, and ~0.72 Hz, respectively. Increasing the duration 

of the smoothing window markedly increased the common drive index. In the example shown, the 

common drive index in creased from 0.1 9 ± 0.0 7 for the 0.15 -s window to 0.7 4 ± 0.1 8 for the 1 -s

window. Similarly, when only significant MU pairs were considered, the thresholded common drive 

index increased from 0.2 9 ± 0.05 to 0.77 ± 0.13. This behavior is expected because longer smoothing 

windows attenuate more high -frequency discharge rate fluctuations and emphasize slower Page 14 of 59 

fluctuations that are more likely to be shared across MU s, as they are relevant for muscle force 

production (Cabral et al., 2025b, Negro et al., 2009, Thompson et al., 2018) . However, this increase 

should not be interpreted simply as stronger common synaptic input. Rather, it reflects the frequency 

content emphasized by the smoothing procedure. Shorter smoothing windows preserve better 

temporal resolution but allow more high -frequency variability to remain in the discharge rate 

estimates, whereas longer windows provide stronger noise attenuation at the expense of excessively 

smoothing the signals. Thus, although a 1 -s Hanning window may produce higher common drive 

index values , the resulting estimate primarily reflects very low -frequency fluctuations in MU 

discharge rates. 

Third, we tested the effect of overlapping between consecutive cross -correlation windows. For this 

analysis, the duration of the cross -correlation window was fixed at 10 s to better illustrate the effect 

of overlapping windows. We compared 0 s overlap (corresponding to non -overlapping windows ;

Figure 2G), 4 s overlap (corresponding to 40% overlap ; Figure 2H), and 8 s overlap (corresponding 

to 80% overlap : Figure 2I). Increasing the overlap between windows produced a modest increase in 

the common drive index from 0 .54 ± 0. 20 for non -overlapping to 0. 56 ± 0.18 for 80% overlap . This 

occur red because overlapping windows provide a smoother sampling of the time -varying cross -

correlation structure and reduce abrupt changes between consecutive segments (i.e., more stable 

estimates) . However, overlapping windows are not statistically independent, because adjacent 

wind ows share part of the same data. Therefore, although overlap can stabilize the estimate, it should 

not be interpreted as adding independent information to the analysis. 

Based on these observations, a 5 -s cross -correlation window is a practical default for estimating the 

common drive index during steady contractions, because it provides sensitivity to local shared 

fluctuations while maintaining sufficient data within each window for cross -correlation analysis. For 

smoothing the bina ry spike trains, a 0.4 -s Hanning window represents a reasonable compromise Page 15 of 59 

between preserving temporal resolution and isolating the low -frequency fluctuations classically 

associated with common drive. Finally, using non -overlapping windows as the default approach 

allows to avoid overweighting redundant portions of the signal. For longer contractions, however, it 

may be useful to test the effect of window overlap ping . In all cases, parameter choices should be 

reported explicitly, because changes in smoothing duration, cross -correlation window duration, and 

window overla pping can influence the magnitude and physiological interpretation of the common 

drive index. 

3.2. Principal component analysis of smoothed discharge rates 

3. 2.1. Physiological interpretation 

Principal component analysis (Hotelling, 1936, Hotelling, 1933, Pearson, 1901) applied to smoothed 

discharge rates provides a data -driven approach to identify the dominant low -dimensional patterns 

shared across a population of MU s (Negro et al., 2009, Cabral et al., 2025b) . Dimensionality reduction 

techniques, such as principal component analysis and factor analysis, have been widely applied to 

neuronal ensemble activity to extract dominant patterns of covariation and identify a reduced set of 

components that capture releva nt features of neural control (Cunningham and Yu, 2014) . When 

applied to smoothed MU discharge rates, these methods allow the investigation of how much of the 

population activity can be explained by a small number of common components. Unlike the common 

drive index, which provides a scalar summary of the average pairwise association among MU s, 

principal component analysis provides time -varying signals representing the dominant modes of 

covariation in the MU population. In this context, the first principal component represents the linear 

combination of smoothed discharge rates that explains the largest amount of shared variance across 

MU s (Negro et al., 2009) . Therefore, when MU activity is strongly governed by common synaptic 

input, a large proportion of the total variance is expected to be captured by the first principal 

component or by a small number of retained components. The application of dimensionality reduction 

to MU spike trains was first introduced to investigate the low -dimensional organization of MU Page 16 of 59 

discharge rates , revealing that the first principal component of MU discharge rates can explain 

oscillations in isometric force more effectively than the discharge rates of individual MU s (Negro et 

al., 2009) . Since then, several studies have used principal component analysis or related approaches 

to estimate low -dimensional components that explain the variability of smoothed discharge rates in 

populations of active MU s (Del Vecchio et al., 2023, Rossato et al., 2024, Nuccio et al., 2024, 

Dernoncourt et al., 2025, Cabral et al., 2025b) . This finding supports the physiological interpretation 

that the dominant component extracted from the population of MU discharge rates may reflect the 

common synaptic input transmitted to the motor neuron pool and expressed in force output. 

3. 2.2. Step -by -step estimation 

The initial steps for estimating the low -dimensional components underlying MU discharge rates are 

similar to those used for the common drive index. The smoothed discharge rate  𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) of the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ MU 

is obtained from its binary spike train  𝑥 𝑖 (𝑡 ) (Figure 3A ) as described in equation (1) . As for the 

common drive index, a 0.4 -s Hanning window is typically used to obtain the smoothed discharge 

rates (Negro et al., 2009) . Edge portions of the signal affected by convolution and filtering can then 

be removed, for example 1 s at the beginning and end of the signal. Subsequently, offsets and slow 

trends are removed from the smoothed discharge rates using a zero -phase high -pass filter with a cut -

off frequency of 0.75 Hz (Figure 3B ). 

After preprocessing, the smoothed discharge rates from all MU s are organized into a data matrix  𝑍 ,

with dimension  𝑇 𝑥 𝑁 , where  𝑇  is the number of time samples , and  𝑁  is the number of MU s. Before 

applying principal component analysis, each MU discharge rate in this matrix is typically 

standardized to have zero mean and unit variance (Joliffe and Morgan, 1992) . T his step ensures that 

all MU s contribute to the analysis on the same scale and prevents MU s with larger discharge -rate 

variance from dominating the estimation of the principal components. After standardization, the Page 17 of 59 

covariance matrix is equivalent to the correlation matrix of the smoothed discharge rates. The next 

step is to compute the symmetric covariance matrix of the standardized smoothed discharge rates: 

Σ = (

𝛾 11 ⋯ 𝛾 1𝑁 

⋮ ⋱ ⋮

𝛾 𝑁 1 ⋯ 𝛾 𝑁𝑁 

) (3)

where  𝛾 𝑖𝑖  represents the variance of the standardized smoothed discharge rate of the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ MU , and  𝛾 𝑖𝑗 

represents the covariance between the standardized smoothed discharge rates of the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ and  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ MU s.

Because the signals are standardized, the diagonal elements of  Σ are equal to one, and the off -diagonal 

elements represent the pairwise correlations between MU discharge rate fluctuations. The covariance 

matrix is then subject to eigenvalue decomposition: 

Σ = 𝑉 Λ𝑉 𝑇 (4)

where  𝑉  is an  𝑁 𝑥 𝑁  matrix containing the eigenvectors as columns  (𝑣 1, 𝑣 2, … , 𝑣 𝑁 ), and  Λ is an 

𝑁 𝑥 𝑁  diagonal matrix containing the corresponding eigenvalues  (𝜆 1, 𝜆 2, … , 𝜆 𝑁 ) , sorted in 

descending order. Each eigenvector contains  𝑁  values of the weights (or loadings) of each MU . Each 

eigenvector defines a weighted combination of MU s, whereas each eigenvalue quantifies the amount 

of variance in the population of smoothed discharge rates explained by the corresponding component. 

Because the standardized data has a total variance equal to the number of MU s 𝑁 , the percentage of 

variance explained by the  𝑘 th  component is given by :

% 𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑏𝑦 𝑃𝐶 𝑘 = 𝜆 𝑘 

𝑁 × 100 (5)Page 18 of 59 

The next step is to decide the number  𝑘  of components to retain (Figure 3C). This is a fundamental 

decision in principal component analysis and is covered in detail in the next subsection. After 

selecting  𝑘 , only the first  𝑘  columns of  𝑉  are retained , resulting in the truncated eigenvector matrix 

𝑉 𝑘 , with dimensions  𝑁 𝑥 𝐾 . Finally, the standardized and detrended smoothed discharge -rate matrix 

is multiplied by  𝑉 𝑘  to obtain the time -varying low -dimensional MU components :

𝑌 = Z𝑉 𝐾 (6)

where  𝑌  is the  𝑇𝑥𝐾  matrix containing the retained principal component time series ( Figure 3D ). 

These components represent the dominant low -dimensional patterns shared across the population of 

MU discharge rates. Page 19 of 59 

Figure 3: Step -by -step estimation of principal component analysis (PCA) from motor unit spike trains. (A) Motor unit spike trains 

obtained from decomposed high -density surface electromyography (HDsEMG) signals. (B) Smoothed discharge rates obtained by 

convolving the motor unit spike trains with a 0.4 -s Hanning window, followed by detrending using a zero -phase high -pass filter with 

a cutoff frequency of 0.75 Hz. (C) Parallel analysis used to determine the number of low -dimensional components to retain. Observed 

eige nvalues (orange) are compared with the 95th percentile of eigenvalues obtained from randomized datasets (blue). In this examp le, 

only the first eigenvalue exceeded the parallel analysis threshold, indicating that a single component should be retained. (D ) First low -

dimensional motor unit component extracted from the detrended smoothed discharge rates. This component represents the dominan t

shared fluctuation across the motor unit population and explains the largest proportion of variance in the motor unit d ischarge rates. 

3. 2.3. Number of components to retain 

An important step when applying principal component analysis (or other data dimensionality 

reduction approaches) to MU discharge rates is determining the number of low -dimensional 

components to retain. Several approaches have been proposed for this purpose, many of them based 

on the eigenvalues obtained from the decomposition of the covariance or correlation matrix (Guttman, 

1954, Horn, 1965, Kaiser, 1960, Cattell, 1966, Velicer, 1976) . One commonly used criterion is the 

𝜆 > 1 (eigenvalue -greater -than -one ) rule, also known as the Kaiser criterion (Kaiser, 1960) . When 

principal component analysis is applied to standardized MU discharge rate data, the total variance of Page 20 of 59 

the population is equal to the number of MU s ( 𝑁 ). Therefore, components with eigenvalues greater 

than one explain more variance than a single original MU discharge rate and are retained. Although 

this criterion is simple and intuitive, it may overestimate or underestimate the number of relevant 

components depending on the structure of the data and the number of MU s included in the analysis. 

Another commonly used approach is based on a cumulative variance threshold. In this case, 

components are retained until a predefined percentage of the total variance is explained (e.g., 70%, 

80%, or 90% ). This method is useful because it directly quantifies how much of the variability in the 

population of smoothed discharge rates is preserved by the retained low -dimensional representation. 

However, the choice of the variance threshold is arbitrary and may strongly influence the number of 

components retained. An alternative data -driven approach is parallel analysis (Horn, 1965, Zwick and 

Velicer, 1986, Velicer et al., 2000, Hayton et al., 2004) , which has been considered one of the most 

accurate methods for identifying the number of components to retain and has been shown to 

outperform several traditional approaches. A detailed tutorial on the use of parallel analysis is 

provided by Hayton et al. (2004) . Briefly, in the context of MU discharge rates, parallel analysis 

compares the eigenvalues from the real data with those expected from random data of similar 

dimension . To generate the random data, the time samples of each standardized and detrended 

smoothed discharge -rate signal are randomly shuffled. This procedure preserves the distribution of 

each MU signal but destroys the temporal covariation among MU s. Principal component analysis is 

then applied to this randomized data matrix, and the eigenvalues obtained for each component are 

stored. This procedure is repeated for several iterations (e.g., 1,000 tim es ), resulting in a distribution 

of random eigenvalues for each component order. The number of low -dimensional MU components 

to retain is then determined by comparing the eigenvalues extracted from the real data with the 

eigenvalues expected from the randomized data. Specifically, a component is retained if its 

eigenvalue exceeds the upper bound of the random eigenva lue distribution, typically defined as the 

95 th percentile. All three approaches for selecting the number of low -dimensional components are 

imp lemented in openhdemg , but p arallel analysis is the default as it provides a data -driven estimate Page 21 of 59 

of the dimensionality of MU discharge -rate patterns while reducing the dependence on arbitrary 

variance or eigenvalue thresholds. 

3. 2.4. Parameter sensitivity and recommendations 

The estimation of the low -dimensional MU components is implemented in openhdemg through the 

function smoothed_dr_pca , with the main structure described in Supplementary Material. For this 

approach , we systematically tested how three main parameters affected the estimates (Figure 4 ): the 

number of MU s included in the analysis , the duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the 

binary spike trains, and the method used to select the number of low -dimensional components to 

retain .

Figure 4: Parameter sensitivity of principal component analysis applied to smoothed motor unit discharge rates. Principal 

component analysis was applied to standardized and detrended smoothed discharge rates to extract the dominant low -dimensional 

components shared across the motor unit population. Panels A –C show the effect of changing the number of motor units in cluded in 

the analysis: 5 motor units (A), 10 motor units (B), and all 21 motor units available in the dataset (C). Gray lines represent the smoo thed 

discharge rates of all individual motor units, whereas the orange line represents the first low -dimensional component. The first 

component already captured the dominant shared fluctuations when 5 motor units were used, with only subtle increases in the average 

cross -correlation between the component and individual motor unit discharge rates when 10 or 21 motor units were included. Panels 

D–F show the effect of changing the duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the binary spike trains: 0.15 s (D ), 0.4 s (E), and 

1 s (F). Longer smoothing windows reduced high -frequency discharge variability and increased the percentage of variance explained 

by the first component, but progressively restricted the analysis to slower fluctuations. Panels G –I show th e effect of changing the Page 22 of 59  

> criterion used to select the number of components to retain: parallel analysis (G), cumulative variance threshold greater tha n 85%
> (H), and eigenvalue -greater -than -one criterion (I). Parallel analysis and the eigenvalue -greater -than -one criterion retained one
> component in this dataset, whereas the cumulative variance criterion retained three components.

First, we tested the effect of the number of MU s included in the analysis. Although this is not a 

specific input parameter of the function implemented in openhdemg , it is an important practical factor 

because the estimation of population -level components depends on the number of MU s available 

from the decomposition. To explore this effect, we randomly selected 5 MU s ( Figure 4A ), 10 MU s

(Figure 4B ), and used the full population of 21 MU s available in the dataset ( Figure 4C ) to estimate 

the low -dimensional MU components. When only 5 MU s were used, the fir st low -dimensional 

component already followed well the smoothed discharge rates of the MU s, showing an average 

cross -correlation of 0.86 . When 10 MU s or all 21 MU s were used, the first low -dimensional 

component showed a smoother and more representative oscillatory profile, but the increases in 

average cross -correlation were subtle, reaching 0.87 and 0.88, respectively. These results indicate 

that a relatively small number of MU s may already be sufficient to capture the dominant shared 

fluctuations in the MU population. However, this might be muscle -dependent and increasing the 

number of MU s provides a more representative estimate of population activity .

Second, we tested the effect of the duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the binary spike 

trains. As for the common drive index, we compared smoothing windows of 0.15 s ( Figure 4D ), 0.4 

s ( Figure 4E ), and 1 s ( Figure 4F ). With the 0.15 -s window, the first low -dimensional component 

contained more high -frequency fluctuations and appeared visually noisier, explaining 51.35% of the 

variance in the smoothed discharge rat es . Increasing the smoothing duration produced smoother 

components and increased the percentage of variance explained by the first component to 77.42% 

with the 0.4 -s window and 83.46% with the 1 -s window. This increase is expected because longer 

smoothing windows attenuate more high -frequency variability and emphasize slower fluctuations that 

are more likely to be shared across MU s. However, as discussed for the common drive index, a higher Page 23 of 59 

percentage of explained variance should not automatically be interpreted as a better or stronger 

estimate of common synaptic input. Longer smoothing windows progressively restrict the analysis to 

lower -frequency fluctuations. Therefore, although a 1 -s Hann ing window may produce a larger 

variance explained by the first component, the resulting component mainly reflects very low -

frequency modulation of MU discharge rates, at the expense of temporal resolution. 

Third, we tested the effect of the method used to select the number of components to retain. We 

compared parallel analysis ( Figure 4G ), a cumulative variance threshold criterion ( Figure 4H ), and 

the eigenvalue -greater -than -one criterion ( Figure 4I ). In this example, both parallel analysis and the 

eigenvalue -greater -than -one criterion retained a single component. Although both methods led to the 

same result in this dataset, parallel analysis provides a more data -driven criterion because the 

eigenval ues from the real data are compared with those expected from randomized data from the 

random shuffling of the original data . In contrast, the eigenvalue -greater -than -one criterion relies on 

a fixed threshold and may over - or underestimate the number of meaningful components. When the 

cumulative variance threshold was set to 85%, three components were retained. Although this 

approach ensures that a predefined amount of total variance is represented, it may retain additional 

components that explain residual variance b ut are not necessarily physiologically meaningful in terms 

of common synaptic input (Cabral et al., 2025b) . Therefore, the choice of component -retention 

method can substantially affect the dimensionality inferred from the MU population. 

Based on these observations, using as many well -identified and sufficiently cleaned MU s as available 

may provide a more representative estimate of population activity. However, an extremely large 

number of MU s may not always be necessary to extract the dominant low -dimensional component, 

particularly when the first component is strongly shared across the population. For smoothing, a 0.4 -

s Hanning window is a practical default, consistent with the common drive index and with previous 

applications of dimensionality reduction to MU discharge rates. This duration provides a reasonable Page 24 of 59 

compromise between attenuating high -frequency discharge variability and preserving the temporal 

structure of low -frequency common fluctuations. Finally, parallel analysis should be used as the 

default method for selecting the number of components to retain , as it provides a data -driven criterion 

and reduces dependence on arbitrary eigenvalue or cumulative variance thresholds. In all cases, the 

number of MU s, the smoothing window duration, the component -retention method, and the 

percentage of variance explai ned by the retained components should be explicitly reported. 

4. Frequency -domain approaches 

4.1. Pooled coherence 

4.1.1. Physiological interpretation 

Pooled coherence quantifies the frequency -specific coupling between populations of MU spike trains. 

Unlike time -domain approaches, which estimate shared fluctuations in smoothed discharge rates, 

coherence analysis identifies the spectral content of the common synaptic input to the motor neuron 

pool. Therefore, significant coherence between MU spike trains at a given frequency is interpreted as 

evidence that motor neurons receive common oscillatory synaptic input at that frequency (Castronovo 

et al., 2015, Negro and Farina, 2012, Negro et al., 2016b, Del Vecchio et al., 2019) . In this context, 

coherence analysis has shown that MU spike trains may exhibit significant coupling across a broad 

range of frequencies up to approximately 80 Hz during isometric contractions (Castronovo et al., 

2015, McManus et al., 2019, Muceli et al., 2022) . The interpretation of coherence is frequency 

dependent. Coherence in the delta band, typically defined between 1 and 5 Hz, has been associated 

with the effective low -frequency control signal delivered to the motor neuron pool , as t his frequency 

range overlaps with the bandwidth of force fluctuations (Farina et al., 2014) . Coherence in the alpha 

band, typically defined between 5 and 15 Hz, has often been associated with physiological tremor 

and rhythmic force fluctuations observed during sustained contractions (Lippold, 1971, McAuley and 

Marsden, 2000) . These oscillations may partly reflect afferent inputs from the active muscles 

projecting to the motor neuron pool (Hagbarth and Young, 1979, Christakos et al., 2006, Laine et al., Page 25 of 59 

2016, Cabral et al., 2024b) . Coherence in the beta band, typically defined between 15 and 35 Hz, is 

commonly interpreted as reflecting corticospinal contributions to motor neuron activity, because 

coupling between cortical and muscle activity has been observed within this frequency range 

(Conway et al., 1995, Baker, 2007, Baker et al., 1997, Negro and Farina, 2011b) . Finally, gamma -

band coherence, commonly defined as frequencies above 35 Hz, may reflect higher -frequency 

components of common synaptic input, including fast descending or spinal inputs, although its 

estimation from MU spike trains is more challenging and requires careful interpretation. 

An important physiological and methodological consideration is that the relation between synaptic 

input to motor neurons and their output spike trains is nonlinear (Negro and Farina, 2011a, Negro and 

Farina, 2011b) . Motor neurons transform continuous synaptic inputs into discrete discharge times, 

and this sampling -like process becomes particularly limited at higher frequencies because individual 

MU s discharge at relatively low rates, often around 10-20 Hz during low -to -moderate force 

contractions (Inglis et al., 2025) . As a result, estimating coherence at higher frequencies, particularly 

in the beta and gamma bands, generally requires larger samples of concurrently active MU s to 

improve the effective sampling of common input and reduce estimation variability (Lazar and 

Pnevmatikakis, 2008, Negro and Farina, 2011a, Negro and Farina, 2011b) . This is one of the main 

reasons why pooled approaches, based on cumulative spike trains from groups of MU s, are preferred 

over pairwise coherence when the goal is to characterize the spectral structure of common synaptic 

input to the motor neuron pool (Farina and Negro, 2015) . Therefore, pooled coherence provides a 

population -level estimate of oscillatory common synaptic input. 

4. 1. 2. Step -by -step estimation 

In contrast to the time -domain approaches described above, pooled coherence is not calculated from 

smoothed discharge rates. Instead, this method is applied directly to the binary spike trains of MU s

(Figure 5A ). The first step is to split the population of MU spike trains into two non -overlapping Page 26 of 59 

groups of equal size, each commonly containing half of the total number of available MU s (Cabral et 

al., 2025a, Cabral et al., 2024a, Cabral et al., 2024b) (Figure 5B ). To reduce the dependency of the 

coherence estimates on a specific allocation of motor units, the assignment of motor units to the two 

groups is performed randomly. For each group, the binary spike trains are summed to obtain two 

cumulative spike trains,  𝑥 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 (𝑡 ) (Figure 5B ). The use of cumulative spike trains increases the 

effective sampling of the common synaptic input received by the motor neuron pool, thereby 

improving the robustness of common input estimates compared with analyses based on individual 

MU pairs (Negro and Farina, 2011a, Negro and Farina, 2011b) . The next step is to estimate the auto -

spectrum of  𝑥 (𝑡 ), the auto -spectrum of  𝑦 (𝑡 ), and the cross -spectrum between  𝑥 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 (𝑡 ). These 

spectra can be defined as the Fourier transforms of the corresponding auto - and cross -correlation 

functions :

𝑃 𝑥𝑥 (𝑓 ) = ∫ 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 (𝜏 )𝑒 −𝑗 2𝜋𝑓𝜏 𝑑𝜏 

> +∞
> −∞

(7)

𝑃 𝑦𝑦 (𝑓 ) = ∫ 𝜌 𝑦𝑦 (𝜏 )𝑒 −𝑗 2𝜋𝑓𝜏 𝑑𝜏 

> +∞
> −∞

(8)

𝑃 𝑥𝑦 (𝑓 ) = ∫ 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (𝜏 )𝑒 −𝑗 2𝜋𝑓𝜏 𝑑𝜏 

> +∞
> −∞

(9)

where  𝜌 𝑥𝑥 (𝜏 ) and  𝜌 𝑦𝑦 (𝜏 ) are the autocorrelation functions of  𝑥 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 (𝑡 ) , respectively, and 

𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (𝜏 ) is the cross -correlation function between  𝑥 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 (𝑡 ) (see equation (2)) , 𝑓  is the frequency, 

τ is the time lag, and  𝑗  is the imaginary unit . Therefore, the auto - and cross -spectra quantify how the 

power of each cumulative spike train, and their shared activity, is distributed across frequency. Page 27 of 59 

In practice, these spectra are typically estimated using Welch’s periodogram method (Welch, 1967) .

In this approach, the cumulative spike trains  𝑥 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 (𝑡 ) are segmented into shorter time windows. 

Each segment is multiplied by a tapering window  𝑤 (𝑡 ), typically a 1-s Hanning window, to reduce 

spectral leakage by attenuating the edges of the segment. The auto - and cross -spectra are then 

estimated for each segment, and the resulting spectra are averaged across segments to obtain smoother 

spectral estimates. This segmenta tion can be performed with or without overlapping between 

consecutive windows. The duration of the analysis window determines the spectral resolution of the 

estimate : longer windows provide higher frequency resolution, while shorter windows provide 

coarser frequency resolution. In addition, b ecause the random splitting of MU s into two cumulative 

spike trains can influence the coherence estimate, the splitting procedure is repeated for a predefined 

number of iterations, commonly up to 100 times (Cabral et al., 2025a, Cabral et al., 2024a, Cabral et 

al., 2024b, Cosentino et al., 2026) (Figure 5C ). When the number of possible unique group splits is 

lower than the requested number of iterations, all possible unique splits are used. In each iteration, 

two new cumulative spike trains are created, and their auto - and cross -spectra are estimated. The auto -

spectra and cross -spectrum are then averaged across iterations, resulting in the pooled spectra  𝑃 ̅𝑥𝑥 ,

𝑃 ̅𝑦𝑦  and  𝑃 ̅𝑥𝑦 . The pooled coherence over the iterations is estimated as in Rosenberg et al. (1989) :

𝐶 𝑥𝑦 (𝑓 ) = |𝑃 ̅𝑥𝑦 |2

𝑃 ̅𝑥𝑥 𝑃 ̅𝑦𝑦 

(10 )

The coherence  𝐶 𝑥𝑦 (𝑓 ) ranges from 0 to 1 and quantifies the degree of linear coupling between the 

two cumulative spike trains at each frequency  𝑓  (Figure 5D ). Values close to 0 indicate little or no 

linear association between the cumulative spike trains at that frequency, whereas values close to 1 

indicate strong coupling. In the context of MU analysis, significant coherence between cumulative 

spike trains is interpreted as evidence of common synaptic input to the motor neuron pool at specific 

frequencies. Page 28 of 59 

An additional step commonly performed before statistical testing or comparison across conditions is 

the transformation of coherence values into z -scores. This transformation is particularly useful when 

comparing coherence estimates obtained across differen t force levels, experimental conditions, or 

analyses involving different numbers of MU s (Laine et al., 2015, Del Vecchio et al., 2019, Maillet et 

al., 2022, Cabral et al., 2025a, Cabral et al., 2024a, Cabral et al., 2024b) . The z -score transformation 

is given by: 

𝑍𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝑓 ) = 𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 × tanh −1 (√𝐶 𝑥𝑦 (𝑓 )) (11 )

where  𝐶 𝑥𝑦 (𝑓 ) is the pooled coherence at frequency  𝑓 . For non -overlapping windows, the factor is 

commonly defined as: 

𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 = √2𝐿 (12 )

where  𝐿  is the number of independent segments used in the spectral estimation . When overlapping 

windows are used, adjacent segments are not fully independent, and this dependency must be 

accounted for when calculating the factor. In openhdemg , this correction is implemented by 

estimating an effective number of independent segments based on the overlap between adjacent 

tapered windows, following the approach proposed by Gallet and Julien (2011) . It is also important 

to note that some studies remove a bias term from the z -score estimate. This bias is often estimated 

empirically as the average z -score coherence between 250 and 500 Hz, because this frequency band 

is expected to contain no significant physiological coherence between MU cumulative spike trains 

(Baker et al., 2003, Castronovo et al., 2015) .Page 29 of 59 

Finally, coherence is commonly summarized within predefined frequency bands. In the MU literature, 

this is typically done by calculating either the average or the area under curve of the coherence or z-

score coherence within frequency bands such as delta (1 -5 Hz) , alpha (5 -15 Hz) , and beta (15 -35 Hz) .

These band -specific estimates allow the user to quantify the strength of common synaptic input within 

physiologically relevant frequency ranges and to compare common input across muscles, tasks, 

experimental c onditions, or parameter choices .

Figure 5: Step -by -step estimation of the pooled coherence from motor unit spike trains . (A) Motor unit spike trains obtained from 

decomposed high -density surface electromyography (HDsEMG) signals. (B) The population of motor unit spike trains is randomly 

split into two non -overlapping groups of equal size. Within each group, the binary spike trains are summed to obtain two cumulative 

spike trains (CSTs). (C) The random splitting procedure is repeated across multiple iterations, in this example 100 iteration s, 

generating different pairs of CSTs from the same motor unit population. For each iteration, auto - and cross -spectra are estimated from 

the two CSTs using Welch’s method. (D) Pooled intramuscular coherence is obtained by averaging the spectral estimates across 

iterations and calculating coherence between the two CST groups. The resulting coherence curve quantifies the frequency -specific 

coupling between motor unit populations and is interpreted as an estimate of oscillatory common synaptic input to the mo tor neuron 

pool. 

4.1.3. Statistical significance Page 30 of 59 

As for the common drive index, a confidence level can be calculated to determine which portions of 

the coherence or z -score coherence curves exceed the values expected by chance. This threshold is 

particularly important when coherence is summarized within predefined frequency bands, because 

the average coherence or the area under the curve is commonly calculated only from the portions of 

the curve that exceed the confidence level. Therefore, the confidence level determines which 

frequency bins are considere d to represent significant common oscillatory input to the motor neuron 

pool. Two main approaches can be used to define the confidence level. The first possibility is to use 

an empirical high -frequency bias, calculated as the average coherence or z -score coherence within a 

frequency range in which significant physiological coherence is not expected, for example , between 

250 and 500 Hz (Baker et al., 2003, Castronovo et al., 2015) . This approach provides a data -driven 

estimate of the baseline level of coherence and can be useful to account for residual bias in the spectral 

estimate. In this case, only coherence or z -score coherence values above the high -frequency bias are 

considere d when computing band -specific estimates. Alternatively, a theoretical confidence level can 

be calculated from the expected distribution of coherence under the null hypothesis of no linear 

association between the two cumulative spike trains. For raw pooled coherence, the 95% confidence 

level is commonly defined as in Rosenberg et al. (1989) :

𝐶𝐿 = 1 − 0.05 1 (𝐿 −1)⁄ (13 )

where L is the number of independent segments used in Welch’s spectral estimation. For z -score 

coherence, the confidence level is commonly defined as 1.65, which corresponds to the 95 th percentile 

of the standard normal distribution. Therefore, z -score coherence values above 1.65 are considered 

significant at the 5% level. Both approaches are implemented in openhdemg and, i n both cases, the 

confidence level is used to threshold the coherence or z -score coherence curve before calculating 

band -specific metric s, such as the average coherence or the area under the curve in the delta, alpha, 

beta and gamma frequency bands. Page 31 of 59 

4.1.4. Parameter sensitivity and recommendations 

The estimation of the common drive index is implemented in openhdemg through the function 

pooled_intramuscular_coherence , with the main structure described in the Supplementary Material. 

For pooled coherence, we systematically tested how three main parameters affected the estimates 

(Figure 6 ): the number of MU s included in each cumulative spike train, the duration of the Hanning 

window used in Welch’s spectral estimation, and the overlap between consecutive Welch windows. 

These parameters influence the robustness, spectral resolution, and variability of the coh erence 

estimate and should therefore be carefully considered when interpreti ng frequency -domain estimates 

of common synaptic input. 

Figure 6: Parameter sensitivity of pooled coherence. Pooled coherence was estimated from cumulative spike trains obtained by 

randomly splitting the population of motor unit spike trains into two non -overlapping groups. Panels A –C show the effect of changing 

the number of motor units included in each cumulat ive spike train: 1 motor unit per cumulative spike train (A), 5 motor units per 

cumulative spike train (B), and half of the total number of available motor units per cumulative spike train, corresponding t o 9 motor 

units in this dataset (C). Note that the area under the curve increas ed from A to C in the delta (from 0.24 to 1.73), alpha (from 0.01 to 

0.38), beta (from 0.01 to 0.27), and gamma (from 0.03 to 0.97) bands . Panels D –F show the effect of changing the duration of the 

Hanning window used in Welch’s spectral estimation: 0.15 s (D), 0.4 s (E), and 1 s (F), corre sponding to frequency resolutions of 

approximately 6.7 Hz, 2.5 Hz, and 1 Hz, respectively. As the Hanning window duration increased, the pooled coherence estimates 

increased, and the spectral profile became more detailed due to improved frequency resolution . These differences were reflected in the 

band -specific estimates, in which delta (from 0.28 to 0.18), alpha (from 0.08 to 0.49), beta (from 0.14 to 0.56), and gamma (from 0.83 Page 32 of 59      

> to 1.12) bands increased from 0.15 -s window to 1 -s window. Panels G –I show the effect of changing the overlap between consecutive
> Welch windows while using a 1 -s Hanning window: 0 s overlap (G), 0.5 s overlap (H), and 0.95 s overlap (I). Gray lines represent
> coherence curves obtained from individual random motor u nit splits, whereas the orange line represents the pooled coherence estimate.
> Increasing the overlap between Welch windows reduced the variability of the coherence estimates across random splits .This effect
> was reflected in the band -specific estimates, with the area under the curve decreasing from G to I in the delta (from 1.80 to 1.75),
> alpha (from 0.49 to 0.38), beta (from 0.56 to 0.29), and gamma (from 1.12 to 0.96) bands. AUC, area under the curve; CoV, coefficient
> of variation.

First, we tested the effect of the number of MU s included in each cumulative spike train. To do this, 

we calculated coherence using 1 MU per cumulative spike train ( Figure 6A ), 5 MU s per cumulative 

spike train ( Figure 6B ), and half of the total number of available MU s per cumulative spike train 

(Figure 6C ). In this dataset, 18 MU s were available; therefore, the last condition corresponded to 9

MU s per cumulative spike train. As expected (Negro and Farina, 2012, Negro et al., 2016b) ,

increasing the number of MU s included in each cumulative spike train increased the magnitude of 

the coherence curve. This effect was reflected in the band -specific estimates, with the area under the 

curve increasing from Figure 6A to Figure 6C in the delta (from 0.24 to 1.73) , alpha (from 0.01 to 

0.38) , beta (from 0.01 to 0.27) , and gamma (from 0.03 to 0.97) bands. This behavior is consistent 

with the rationale of pooled coherence: summing the spike trains of multiple MU s increases the 

effective sampling of the common synaptic input to the motor neuron pool and attenuates the 

influence of independent discharge variability. Therefore, coherence estimates obtained from 

cumulative spike trains containing larger MU samples are generally more robust than estimates 

obtained from individual MU pairs. 

Second, we tested the effect of the duration of the Hanning window used in Welch’s spectral 

estimation. We compared window durations of 0.15 s ( Figure 6D ), 0.4 s ( Figure 6E ), and 1 s ( Figure 

6F ), corresponding to spectral resolutions of approximately 6.7 Hz, 2.5 Hz, and 1 Hz, respectively. 

With the 0.15 -s window, the coherence curve showed low values and coarse spectral resolution, 

making it difficult to determine coherence within narrow frequency band widths , particularly at low 

frequencies. As the Hanning window duration increased, the pooled coherence estimates increased, 

and the spectral profile became more detailed due to improved frequency resolution. These Page 33 of 59 

differences were reflected in the band -specific estimates , in which delta (from 0.28 to 0.18) , alpha 

(from 0.08 to 0.49) , beta (from 0.14 to 0.56) , and gamma (from 0.83 to 1.12) bands increased from 

0.15 -s window to 1 -s window. Therefore, the choice of window duration depends on the objective of 

the analysis. Shorter windows may be useful when temporal localization is prioritized, but they 

provide poor frequency resolution and may obscure narrow -band coherence. Longer windows 

imp rove frequency resolution and are more appropriate when the goal is to quantify coherence within 

specific frequency bands. A 1 -s Hanning window provides a frequency resolution of approximately 

1 Hz and represents a practical compromise that has been widely used in the MU literature. 

Finally, we tested the effect of overlapping between consecutive Welch windows. For this analysis, 

the duration of the Hanning window was fixed at 1 s, and overlap was varied from 0 s (non -

overlapping ; Figure 6G ), to 0.5 s (5 0% overlap ; Figure 6H ), and 0.95 s (95% overlap ; Figure 6I ). 

Increasing the overlap reduced the variability of the coherence estimates across iterations, as visually 

indicated by the smaller dispersion of the gray curves representing the coherence curves obtained 

from each random split of MU s. To quantify this effect, we calculated the coefficient of variation 

across the iteration -wise coherence curves up to 80 Hz, which decreased from 70% with no overlap 

to 63% with 95% overlap. This effect was reflected in the band -specific estimates, with the area under 

the curve decreasing from Figure 6G to Figure 6I in the delta (from 1.80 to 1.7 5), alpha (from 0. 49 

to 0. 38 ), beta (from 0. 56 to 0.2 9), and gamma (from 1.12 to 0.9 6) bands. Therefore, overlapping 

windows can provide more stable and less variable spectral estimates. However, adjacent overlapping 

segments are not statistically independent, and this dependency should be considered when 

calculating z -score transformation , as detailed in the previous subsection . Thus, although high overlap 

can improve the empirical stability of the estimate, it should not be interpreted as a proportional 

increase in independent information. Page 34 of 59 

Based on these observations, it is recommended to use half of the total number of available MU s in 

each cumulative spike train whenever possible, while ensuring that the two cumulative spike trains 

are composed of non -overlapping MU groups. This maximizes the population -level representation of 

common synaptic input while preserving independent groups for coherence estimation. It is important 

to note that, a s demonstrated in Figure 6A -C, increasing the number of MUs contributing to the 

cumulative spike train s systematically increases the magnitude of the coherence estimates across 

frequency bands. Therefore, when comparing coherence between experimental conditions, 

interventions, muscles, populations, or time points, it is important to standardize the number of MUs 

included in the analysis. Otherwise, apparent differences in coherence may simply reflect differences 

in the number of MUs contributing to the cumulative spike trains rather than true physiological 

differences in common synaptic input (Castronovo et al., 2015, Negro and Farina, 2012) . For spectral 

estimation, a 1 -s Hanning window is a practical default because it provides approximately 1 -Hz 

frequency resolution and allows the identification of coherence within commonly analyzed frequency 

bands. Finally, 50% overlap can be used as a conservative default for Welch’s method, although 

higher overlap values may also be used to obtain smoother and less variable estimates, as performed 

in recent studies from our group (Cabral et al., 2025a, Cabral et al., 2024a, Cabral et al., 2024b) .

When high overlap is used, the effective number of independent segments should be considered for 

statistical testing and z -score transformation. In all cases, the number of MU s per cumulative spike 

train, window duration, overlap, frequency resolution, and confidence -level procedure should be 

explicitly reported. 

4.2. Proportion of common input index 

4.2.1. Physiological interpretation 

The proportion of common input (PCI) index is based on the approach proposed by Negro et al. 

(2016b) . This method was developed to overcome an important limitation of classical pairwise 

correlation and coherence analyses, which can indicate whether MU spike trains share common Page 35 of 59 

fluctuations but do not directly quantify the proportion of common input relative to the overall 

synaptic input received by the motor neurons. The method relies on the principle that the cumulative 

spike train progressively enhances the representation of c ommon synaptic input as more MU s are 

included, while independent components of the synaptic input are attenuated through population 

averaging (Negro and Farina, 2012, Negro et al., 2016b) . Therefore, by estimating coherence between 

cumulative spike trains composed of increasing numbers of MU s, it is possible to model how shared 

input becomes more strongly represented in the motor neuron pool output. The experimental 

coherence values obtained for different cumulative spike train sizes are then fitted with a nonlinear 

model that separates the contribution of common and independent input components. The resulting 

PCI index obtained from parameters of this fit provides an estimate of the relative contribution of 

common synaptic input to the total synaptic input received by the motor neuron pool. In its original 

formulation, the method was applied to low -frequency common input below 5 Hz (delta band) ,

reflecting the slow -varying components of synaptic input that are most strongly transmitted to force 

output during isometric contractions (Farina et al., 2014, Negro et al., 2009, Cabral et al., 2025b, 

Thompson et al., 2018) .

4.2 .2. Step -by -step estimation 

The initial steps for estimating the proportion of common input index are similar to those described 

for pooled coherence. The analysis starts from the binary spike trains of the detected MU s, which are 

used to form two non -overlapping cumulative spike trains. For each cumulative spike train, the binary 

spike trains of the selected MU s are summed, and coherence between the two cumulative spike trains 

is estimated as described in Section 4.1.2 (Figure 5 ).

The main difference from pooled coherence is that the coherence estimation is repeated while 

systematically varying the number of MU s included in each cumulative spike train. Let  𝑁  be the total 

number of detected MU s. The number of MU s per cumulative spike train,  𝑛 , is varied from 1 to the Page 36 of 59 

maximum possible value, corresponding to half of the total number of detected MU s. For each value 

of  𝑛 , the MU s are randomly divided into two non -overlapping groups containing  𝑛  MU s each. 

Coherence is then calculated between the two cumulative spike trains obtained from these groups. 

This procedure is repeated for multiple iterations, commonly up to 100 times, and the pooled 

coherence is calculated for each value of  𝑛  (Figure 7A ). When the number of possible unique group 

splits is lower than the requested number of iterations, all possible unique splits are used. After 

obtaining the pooled coherence curve for each cumulative spike train size, the average coherence is 

calculated within predefined frequency bands. In the original formulation, Negro et al. (2016b) 

focused on the low -frequency band below 5 Hz, reflecting the slow -varying common synaptic input 

to the motor neuron pool. In the present implementation, the same approach was also extended to 

other frequency bands, including alpha (5 -15 Hz) and beta (15 -35 Hz). For each frequency band, this 

procedure results in a curve describing how the average coherence changes as a function of the 

number of MU s included in each cumulative spike train (Figure 7 B). T he relationship between the 

number of MU s per cumulative spike train and the average coherence is then fitted using the model 

proposed by Negro et al. (2016b) :

𝐶 (𝑛 ) = (𝑛 2𝐴 )2

(𝑛𝐵 + 𝑛 2𝐴 )2 (13 )

where  𝐶 (𝑛 ) is the average coherence for the selected bandwidth obtained when each cumulative spike 

train contains  𝑛  MU s, and  𝐴  and  𝐵  are model parameters estimated by least -squares fitting. In this 

framework,  𝐴  is associated with the common component of the synaptic input, whereas  𝐵  is 

associated with the independent component . Therefore, the fitted curve describes how the 

representation of common synaptic input in the cumulative spike trains increases as more MU s are 

included in the estimate (Figure 7B ). The proportion of common input index is calculated from the 

fitted parameters as: Page 37 of 59 

𝑃𝐶𝐼 = √𝐴 𝐵 ⁄

Therefore, higher PCI values indicate that a greater proportion of the synaptic input represented in 

the motor neuron pool output is common across MU s. When the analysis is applied separately to 

different frequency bands, the PCI can be interpreted as a band -specific estimate of the proportion of 

common input . However, although the PCI framework can be extended to higher frequency bands, 

the resulting estimates may be more susceptible to distortion and estimation variability than those 

obtained in the low -frequency range originally proposed (Negro et al., 2016b) .

Figure 7: Step -by -step estimation of the proportion of common input (PCI) index from motor unit spike trains. (A) Coherence curves 

obtained by progressively increasing the number of motor units included in each cumulative spike train. In this example, 31 m otor 

units were identified; therefore, the number of motor units per cumulative spike train was varied from 1 to 15. As more motor units 

were included in each cumulative spike train, the coherence magnitude increased, reflecting the enhanced representation of common 

synaptic input in the population spike trains. (B) Relationship between the number of motor units per cumulative spike train and the 

average coherence calculated within predefined frequency bands. Circles represent the average coherence values for the delta, alpha, 

and beta bands, whereas solid lines represent the nonlinear least -squares fits used to estimate the proportion of common input index. 

The PCI is calculated from the fitted model parameters and p rovides a band -specific estimate of the r elative contribution of common 

synaptic input with respect to the total synaptic input. 

4.2.4. Parameter sensitivity and recommendations 

The estimation of the PCI index is implemented in openhdemg through the function pci_index , with 

the main structure described in the Supplementary Material. For this approach , we systematically 

tested how three main parameters affected the estimates ( Figure 8 ): the total number of MU s included Page 38 of 59 

in the analysis , the duration of the Hanning window used in Welch’s spectral estimation, and the 

overlap between consecutive Welch windows. 

Figure 8: Parameter sensitivity of the proportion of common input index (PCI) . The PCI was estimated by fitting the relationship 

between the average coherence and the number of motor units included in each cumulative spike train (CST). Panels A –C show the 

effect of changing the total number of motor units available for the analysis : 8 motor units (A), 20 motor units (B), and 31 motor units 

(C). Increasing the number of motor units resulted in a clearer saturation of the coherence -versus -CST -size relationshi p, although the 

resulting PCI estimates were relatively similar across conditions. Panels D –F show the effect of changing the duration of the Hanning 

window used in Welch’s spectral estimation: 0.15 s (D), 0.4 s (E), and 1 s (F). Longer windows increased the estimated PCI in the 

delta band by improving the resolution of low -frequency coherence, whereas alpha - and beta -band PCI estimates were less affected. 

Panels G –I show the effect of changing the overlap between consecutiv e Welch windows while using a 1 -s Hanning window: 0 s overlap 

(G), 0.5 s overlap (H), and 0.95 s overlap (I). Changes in overlap had minimal influence on the resulting PCI estimates acros s all 

frequency bands. In each panel, circles represent the average coherence values obtained for different cumulative spike train sizes, 

whereas solid lines represent the nonlinear least -squares fit used to estimate the PCI. Delta -, alpha -, and beta -band PCI values are 

reported in orange, blue , and green , respectively .

First, we tested the effect of the number of MU s included in the analysis. To investigate this effect, 

we randomly selected 8 MU s (allowing up to 4 MU s per cumulative spike train; Figure 8A ), 20 MU s

(allowing up to 10 MU s per cumulative spike train; Figure 8B ), and used the full population of 31 

MU s available in the dataset (allowing up to 15 MU s per cumulative spike train; Figure 8C ). As the 

number of available MU s increased, the relationship between the number of MU s in the cumulative 

spike train and the average coherence became progressively less steep and showed a clearer saturation Page 39 of 59 

behavior at larger cumulative spike train sizes. This behavior is expected because larger MU 

populations provide a more complete representation of the common synaptic input. In contrast, when 

only a few MU s are available, the fitted curve may become steeper, potentially leading to 

overestimation of the PCI index. Interestingly, despite these differences in curve shape, the PCI 

estimates obtained with 8 MU s were already very similar to those obtained with 20 or 31 MU s. 

Therefore, although larger MU populatio ns provide more robust estimates, meaningful PCI estimates 

can still be obtained from relatively small MU samples .

Second, we tested the effect of the duration of the Hanning window used in Welch’s spectral 

estimation. As for pooled coherence, we compared window durations of 0.15 s ( Figure 8D ), 0.4 s 

(Figure 8E ), and 1 s ( Figure 8F ). The PCI estimated in the delta band increased substantially, from 

0.4 with a 0.15 -s window to 0.8 with a 1 -s window. This behavior is a direct consequence of the 

effects observed in Figures 6D -F for pooled coherence. Longer analysis windows improve frequency 

resolution and allow a more accurate estimation of low -frequency coherence, which is the primary 

frequency range targeted by the original PCI formulation. In contrast, shorter windows provide poorer 

frequency resolution and tend to underestimate low -frequency coherence, leading to lower PCI values. 

Finally, we tested the effect of overlapping between consecutive windows. Using a fixed Hanning 

window duration of 1 s, overlap was varied from 0 s ( no -overlapping; Figure 8G ) to 0.5 s (50% 

overlap; Figure 8H ), and 0.95 s (95% overlap; Figure 8I ). In contrast to pooled coherence, changing 

the overlap produced only minor changes in the PCI estimates across all frequency bands. This result 

is expected because overlap mainly affects the variability and smoothness of the coherence estimates 

rather th an their av erage magnitude. Consequently, the fitted curves and the resulting PCI estimates 

remained largely unchanged across overlap conditions. Page 40 of 59 

Based on these observations, all available cleaned MU s should be included whenever possible, as 

larger MU populations provide a more representative characterization of the common synaptic input. 

Nevertheless, the present results suggest that relatively few MU s may already provide reliable PCI 

estimates, particularly when saturation of the fitted curve is observed. A 1-s Hanning window appears 

appropriate , consistent with the original proposition of (Negro et al., 2016b) , because it provides 

adequate frequency resolution for estimating low -frequency coherence and yields stable PCI 

estimates. Finally, no overlap between windows can be used , following the original implementation 

of the method, although overlap had little influence on the resulting PCI estimates in the present 

analysis. Importantly, because the original theoretical framework was developed to quantify the slow -

varying common synaptic input represented in the delta band, and because higher -frequency 

oscillation s are increasingly affected by the nonlinear transformation from synaptic input to motor 

neuron output spike trains, it is strongly recommend ed to interpret the delta -band PCI as the primary 

physiological estimate of the proportion of common synaptic input. Estimates obtained in higher -

frequency bands should be considered exploratory and interpreted with appropriate caution. 

5. Network -information nonlinear framework 

5.1. Physiological interpretation 

Most approaches for estimating common synaptic input from MU spike trains, including the time -

and frequency -domain methods described in the previous sections, rely predominantly on linear 

techniques. These methods have provided important insights into the shared input received by motor 

neuron populations, but they impose assumptions that may not fully capture nonlinear dependencies 

among MU outputs. Moreover, even when population -level signals such as cumulative spike trains 

are used, the analysis often re mains based on pairwise comparisons between two signals. As a result, 

these approaches quantify the magnitude or spectral content of shared fluctuations but provide limited 

information about how dependencies are organized across the MU population as a functional network. 

To characterize potential nonlinear interactions among MU discharge patterns, a recently developed Page 41 of 59 

framework combining information and network theor ies (O'Reilly and Delis, 2024, O'Reilly and Delis, 

2022) can be applied to MU activity (Cabral et al., 2025b) . In this framework, mutual information is 

used to quantify the statistical dependence between pairs of MU discharge rates. Mutual information 

provides a general measure of dependence between two random variables because it does not assume 

that the relationship is linear or monotonic (Cover, 1999) . Therefore, in contrast to correlation -based 

approaches, mutual information can capture nonlinear dependencies that may be present in MU 

activity. When applied to smoothed MU discharge rates, this approach estimates the degree of shared 

information between each pair of MU s and represents these dependencies as a weighted network 

(Cabral et al., 2025b) . After thresholding the network to retain only relevant dependencies, graph -

theoretical tools can be used to identify groups of MU s that are more strongly connected to each other 

than to the rest of the population. These groups can be interpreted as functional MU communities, 

reflecting subsets of MU s with similar or strongly coupled discharge rate fluctuations. In this network, 

ea ch node corresponds to one MU , and each edge represents the strength of the mutual information 

between two MU s. Network theory ha s also been used recently to represent the linear dependencies 

(i.e., pairwise cross -correlations ) between MU s (Hug et al., 2023b) .

5.2 . Step -by -step estimation 

The first preprocessing steps are similar to those used for the time -domain approaches described 

previously. The binary spike train of each MU (Figure 9 A) is converted into a smoothed discharge 

rate using a Hanning window, edge portions affected by convolution and filtering are removed, and 

slow offsets or trends are attenuated using a zero -phase high -pass filter (Figure 9 B). This results in 

a matrix of detrended smoothed discharge rates, with dimensions  𝑇 𝑥 𝑁 , where  𝑇  is the number of 

time samples , and  𝑁  is the number of MUs .

The detailed mathematical formulation of the information - and network -theoretic procedures has been 

described extensively elsewhere (Ince et al., 2017, O'Reilly and Delis, 2024, O'Reilly and Delis, 2022) .Page 42 of 59 

Therefore, only the main processing steps are summarized here. First, each smoothed discharge rate 

is transformed using copula normalization (Ince et al., 2017) . This procedure ranks the samples of 

each MU discharge -rate signal, rescales the ranks to empirical cumulative probabilities, and then 

maps these probabilities onto a standard Gaussian distribution. This transformation preserves the 

rank -based dependence structure between variables while removing the influence of their marginal 

distributions. Mutual information between two smoothed discharge rate s 𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) and  𝑦 𝑗 (𝑡 ) of the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ

and  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ MU s can be expressed as: 

𝑀𝐼 (𝑌 𝑖 , 𝑌 𝑗 ) = 𝐻 (𝑌 𝑖 ) + 𝐻 (𝑌 𝑗 ) − 𝐻 (𝑌 𝑖 , 𝑌 𝑗 )

where  𝑌 𝑖  and  𝑌 𝑗  denote the samples of the smoothed discharge rate signals over time , 𝐻 (𝑌 𝑖 ) and 

𝐻 (𝑌 𝑗 ) are their marginal entropies , and  𝐻 (𝑌 𝑖 , 𝑌 𝑗 ) their joint entropy. Thus, mutual information 

quantifies the reduction in uncertainty about one MU discharge rate when the other is known. After 

copula normalization, mutual information was estimated using a Gaussian copula formulation. For 

two scalar copula -normalized MU discharge rate s, this can be written as :

𝑀𝐼 (𝑌 ̃𝑖 , 𝑌 ̃𝑗 ) = − 1

2 log 2(1 − 𝜌 𝑖𝑗 2)

where  𝑌 ̃𝑖  and  𝑌 ̃𝑗  are the copula -normalized MU discharge rate s, and  𝜌 𝑖𝑗  is the Pearson correlation 

coefficient between them . This formulation provides an efficient estimate of statistical dependence 

while reducing the influence of the marginal distributions of individual MU discharge rates via an 

initial rank -based copula transformation .

Gaussian copula mutual information is calculated between all possible pairs of MU s. Conceptually, 

this step is similar to the pairwise structure used in the common drive index, but instead of calculating Page 43 of 59 

cross -correlation between MU discharge rates, the method calculates the amount of shared 

information between them. The result is a symmetric pairwise mutual information matrix of 

dimension  𝑁 𝑥 𝑁  MUs , in which each element represents the strength of the statistical dependence 

between two MU s (Figure 9B ). To reduce the influence of weak or potentially spurious dependencies, 

the weighted network is thresholded using a modified percolation analysis (Gallos et al., 2012) . This 

procedure progressively removes weak connections until the global connected structure of the 

network begins to be affected, providing a data -driven threshold for retaining the most relevant 

dependencies. 

Finally, the thresholded network is analyzed using graph -theoretical tools (Figure 9D ). Significant 

mutual information values define the edges of the MU network, and community -detection procedures 

are used to identify groups of strongly connected MU s. In the present implementation, link 

communities are identified using hierarchical clustering of network edges (Ahn et al., 2010) , allowing 

MU s to participate in multiple functional groups when their connections support such an organization. 

The resulting communities provide a low -dimensional description of the MU population based on its 

nonlinear dependency structure.    

> Figure 9:Step -by -step estimation of the n etwork -information nonlinear framework from motor unit spike trains.

5. 3. Statistical significance Page 44 of 59 

To identify the most relevant pairwise dependencies among MU s, the mutual information matrix was 

thresholded using a modified percolation analysis adapted from Gallos et al. (2012) . In this procedure, 

the weighted network is progressively thresholded by removing weaker edges, and the connectivity 

structure of the graph is monitored as the threshold increases . The selected threshold corresponds to 

the highest mutual information value that preserves the global connected structure of the network 

before it fragments into disconnected components. All mutual information values below this threshold 

are set to zero, whereas the remaining edges are retained as relevant functional dependencies between 

MU s. Th is procedure provides a data -driven criterion to remove weak or potentially spurious 

connections while preserving the main topology of the MU network. The resulting thresholded matrix 

is then used as the adjacency matrix for graph visualization and community detection. 

5.4 . Parameter sensitivity and recommendations 

The estimation of the network -information framework using mutual information is implemented in 

openhdemg through the function smoothed_dr_mutualinformation , with the main structure described 

in the Supplementary Material. For this approach , we systematically tested how two main parameters 

affected the estimates ( Figure 10 ): the total number of MU s included in the analysis and the duration 

of the Hanning window used to smooth the MU discharge rates .Page 45 of 59 

Figure 10: Parameter sensitivity of the network -information framework based on mutual information. The network -information 

framework was applied to detrended smoothed motor unit discharge rates to estimate nonlinear pairwise dependencies among moto r

units and characterize their network organization. Panels A –C show the effect of changing the number of motor units included in the 

analysis: 5 motor units (A), 10 motor units (B), and all 21 motor units available in the dataset (C). Increasing the number o f motor 

units r esulted in progressively denser mutual information networks, as shown by the reduction in dark -blue regions in the pairwise 

mutual information matrices and by the increase in retained network connections. Network density, defined as the proportion o f

retai ned connections relative to the total number of possible connections, increased from 0.60 with 5 motor units to 0.90 with 21 motor 

units. Panels D –F show the effect of changing the duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the binary spike trains befor e mutual 

information estimation: 0.15 s (D), 0.4 s (E), and 1 s (F). Longer smoothing windows increased the average thresholded mutual 

information across motor unit pairs and resulted in denser networks, reflecting the greater emphasis on slower discharge -rate 

fluctuations shared across motor units. In each panel, the matrix represents pairwise mutual information values between motor units, 

whereas the network representation shows motor units as nodes and retained mutual information values as edges. Orange nodes 

indicate motor units assigned to the first low -dimensional component identified using link -community analysis, whereas gray nodes 

indicate motor units not assigned to this component. 

First, we tested the effect of the number of MU s included in the analysis. To investigate this effect, 

we randomly selected 5 MU s ( Figure 10A ), 10 MU s ( Figure 10B ), and used the full population of 

21 MU s available in the dataset ( Figure 10C ). Increasing the number of MU s resulted in 

progressively denser mutual information networks. This can be observed both in the pairwise mutual Page 46 of 59 

information matrices, where fewer dark -blue regions (i.e., pairwise mutual information below the 

threshold) were present as the number of MU s increased, and in the corresponding network 

representations. Network density, defined as the proportion of retained connections relative to the 

total number of possible connections, increased from 0.60 when 5 MU s were included to 0.90 when 

all 21 MU s were used. These results indicate that larger MU samples provide a more complete 

representation of the nonlinear depend ency structure within the MU population. In addition, the 

number of MU s represented by orange nodes, indicating MU s participating in the first low -

dimensional component identified by link -community analysis, remained high across conditions, 

whereas gray nodes represented MU s not assigned to this component. 

Second, we tested the effect of the duration of the Hanning window used to smooth the binary spike 

trains before mutual information estimation. As for the previous time -domain approaches, we 

compared smoothing windows of 0.15 s ( Figure 10D ), 0.4 s ( Figure 10E) , and 1 s ( Figure 10F ). 

Increasing the smoothing duration substantially increased the strength of the detected dependencies 

among MU s. The average thresholded mutual information across MU pairs increased from 0.24 ±

0.06 with the 0.15 -s window to 0.94 ± 0.24 with the 1 -s window. Network density also increased, 

from 0.79 to 0.90. This behavior is expected because longer smoothing windows attenuate high -

frequency discharge variability and emphasize slower fluctuations that are more likely to be shared 

acro ss MU s. However, as discussed for the common drive index and principal component analysis, 

higher mutual information values or denser networks should not automatically be interpreted as 

stronger common synaptic input. Longer smoothing windows progressivel y restrict the analysis to 

lower -frequency fluctuations and reduce the temporal resolution of the estimated dependency 

structure. 

Based on these observations, using as many well -identified and sufficiently cleaned MU s as available 

may provide a more representative characterization of the network structure underlying MU Page 47 of 59 

discharge -rate fluctuations. However, comparisons across conditions, muscles, populations, or time 

points should consider differences in MU yield, as the number of MUs included can influence the 

resulting network density and dependency structure. For smoothing, a 0.4 -s Hanning window is a

practical default, consistent with the time -domain approaches described previously. This window 

duration provides a reasonable compromise between reducing high -frequency discharge variability 

and preserving the temporal st ructure of shared fluctuations among MU s. In all cases, the number of 

MU s, smoothing window duration, thresholding procedure, network density, and community -

detection approach should be explicitly reported. 

6. From HDsEMG decomposition to motor unit cleaning and common synaptic input estimation 

Because all estimates of common input strongly depend on the quality of the decomposed MU spike 

trains, MU decomposition, inspection, and cleaning should not be considered simple preprocessing 

steps. Rather, they represent essential stages of the analysis pipeline, directly influencing the 

physiological validity of the resulting estimates. This requires tools that support both accurate 

discharge detection and careful assessment of the identified MU spike trains. 

In the version used for this tutorial (v 0.2.0b1 ; https://www.giacomovalli.com/openhdemg/what%27s -

new/#020 -beta1 ), the openhdemg library provides an integrated set of tools for HDsEMG 

decomposition, MU inspection and cleaning through a graphical interface, and estimation of common 

synaptic input using different analytical approaches . However, given the precision required in MU 

cleaning for common synaptic input estimation, the workflow presented below uses the openhdemg 

software (v0.1.0b3;  https://www.giacomovalli.com/openhdemg_software/ ), which is built on top of 

the openhdemg library and provides the most advanced graphical environment for detailed visual 

inspection, operator -guided refinement, and correction of MU discharge times. 

6.1. Decomposition of HDsEMG signals into motor unit spike trains using openhdemg Page 48 of 59 

HDsEMG signals were decomposed using the convolutive blind source separation approach 

implemented in openhdemg . This approach is based on the framework described by Negro et al. 

(2016a) , in which multichannel EMG recordings are modelled as convolutive mixtures of MU spike 

trains, with the MU action potentials representing the finite -duration impulse responses through 

which each source is observed across the electrode array. To make the inverse problem more 

favorable for source separation , the recorded signals are temporally extended, so that the original 

convolutive mixture is reformulated as an instantaneous linear mixture of delayed observations 

(Holobar and Zazula, 2007b, Holobar and Zazula, 2007a) . The extended observation matrix is then 

centered and whitened, reducing second -order correlations between channels and improving the 

conditioning of the source separation problem. MU sources are extracted iteratively using a fixed -

point optimization procedure analogous to FastICA (Hyvärinen and Oja, 1997) , where a nonlinear 

contrast function is used to identify sparse sources corresponding to candidate MU discharge trains. 

To reduce repeated convergence to the same source, each newly estimated separation vector is 

orthogonalized with respect to previously extracted separation vectors, reducing repeated 

convergence to the same source (Hyvärinen and Oja, 2000) . For each extracted component, the 

corresponding separation vector is applied to the whitened extended EMG signals to obtain a 

continuous source estimate. This source estimate is then transformed by multiplying it by its absolute 

value, similar to the original formulation, but emphasizing large -amplitude peaks. Candidate 

discharge times are identified from the transformed signal by peak detection and then classified using 

two -class k -means clustering. The high -amplitude peak cluster is retained as the disc harge train of 

the candidate MU , and its quality is quantified using the silhouette score. The separation vector is 

subsequently refined by recalculating it from the detected discharge times and repeating source 

estimation and peak classification while the silhouette score improves. Fin ally, only sources 

exceeding the selected silhouette threshold are retained as decomposed MU s. Page 49 of 59 

The openhdemg implementation follows this general model while introducing practical and 

methodological adaptations. Whitening is performed using an eigenvalue -based dimensionality 

reduction step, in which low -variance components can be discarded according to a user -def ined 

percentile threshold. The main decomposition parameters, including the extension factor, number of 

extraction iterations, contrast function, convergence tolerance, clustering initialization, maximum 

physiological discharge rate, minimum number of spik es, and silhouette threshold, are user -

configurable. In addition, post -extraction separation vector refinement is implemented by 

recalculating the filter from the detected discharge times and iterating until the silhouette score 

improves, rather than using the coefficient of variation of the inter spike intervals as the stopping 

criterion. Finally, the high -level decomposition pipeline includes optional band -pass filtering, power -

line harmonic removal, exclusion of channels marked as poor quality, storage of all decomposition 

parameters, reconstruction of binary MU discharge trains, and post -processing removal of duplicate 

MU s. Thus, the implementation retains the physiological and mathematical basis of the Negro et al. 

(2016a) framework while providing a simple, reproducible , and configurable workflow for HDsEMG 

decomposition. 

6.2. Visualization and cleaning of decompos ed motor unit s using the openhdemg software 

Following automatic decomposition, the identified MU spike trains must be visually inspected and, 

when necessary, manually refined before estimating common synaptic input (Avrillon et al., 2024, 

Del Vecchio et al., 2020, Afsharipour et al., 2020) . This approach has been shown to be highly reliable 

across operators (Hug et al., 2021) .

In the current workflow, for each MU, the operator inspected the estimated discharge times along 

with the corresponding source and discharge behavior, allowing potential errors in discharge -time 

detection to be identified. Typical corrections include removing spurious discharges, adding missed 

discharges when clearly detectable, excluding unreliable MU s, and checking for duplicated discharge Page 50 of 59 

patterns representing the same MU . MU cleaning was guided by both signal -based and physiological 

criteria. Signal -based criteria include the separation between discharge and noise clusters in the 

source estimate, quantified by the silhouette score (≥ 0.9), the consistency of the detected peaks, and 

the absence of duplicated discharge patterns. An additional important consideration for common 

synaptic input estimation was that the analysis should preferably be performed using MU s that 

discharge tonically thr oughout the selected analysis window. The inclusion of MU s with intermittent 

firing, recruitment or derecruitment events, or long silent periods can introduce slow fluctuations in 

the smoothed discharge rate s that are not necessarily related to common synaptic input. These 

nonstationary changes may artificially increase or distort low -frequency oscillations, affecting the 

estimates. Physiological criteria include a plausible discharge rate range (Inglis et al., 2025) , realistic 

inter spike interval variability, and the absence of abrupt or non -physiological changes in firing 

behavior. It is important to note that this physiological assessment must always consider the task -

imposed modulation , such as changes in force level or contraction dynamics, as well as any 

pathological condition of the participant that might affect the expected physiological discharge 

behavior .

Manual inspection and cleaning of MU spike trains is the most time -consuming step of the analysis. 

In the present workflow, the openhdemg software was used to streamline this process by combining 

rapid navigation and editing of discharge times using keyboard shortcuts , and simultaneous 

visualization of the source estimate and discharge behavior with real -time updates upon manual 

editing of the detected discharge times . Key quality controls, including the silhouette score, duplicate -

unit detection, and MU ac tion potential visualization, allowed the operator to quickly and reliably 

evaluate each MU using both quantitative indicators and physiological plausibility before retaining it 

for common synaptic input analyses. 

6.3. Effect of motor unit cleaning on common synaptic input estimates Page 51 of 59 

To demonstrate the effect of MU cleaning on common synaptic input estimates, we used the dataset 

containing 31 MU s described previously. Two versions of the same dataset were generated. In the 

first version, 8 MU s (13, 14, 16, 21, 22, 24, 29, and 30 ) were intentionally left insufficiently cleaned 

(but still with high silhouette values) , while the remaining 23 MU s were fully cleaned (Figure 11A ,

left panel). In the second version, all 31 MU s were fully cleaned by an experienced operator ( Figure 

11A , right pa nel). Therefore, the two datasets differed only in the quality of the decomposition of 

these eight MU s. We then estimated common synaptic input using four of the approaches described 

in this tutorial: the common drive index ( Figure 11B ), principal component analysis of smoothed 

discharge rates ( Figure 11C ), pooled coherence ( Figure 11D ), and the proportion of common input 

index ( Figure 11E ). The two files used in the following examples, together with example codes to 

perform common synaptic input estimation using openhdemg as explained in this tutorial, are 

available at  https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.32751243 .          

> Figure 11: Effect of motor unit cleaning on common synaptic input estimates. (A) Example discharge rate of the motor unit used in
> the analysis. The left panel shows the dataset containing 8 insufficiently cleaned motor units (motor units 13, 14, 16, 21, 2 2, 24, 29,
> and 30), whereas the right panel shows the same dataset after all motor units were fully clea ned. The two datasets differed only in the
> quality of decomposition of these motor units. (B) Pairwise correlation matrices and common drive index estimates obtain ed from the
> insufficiently cleaned and fully cleaned datasets. (C) Principal component analysis of smoothed discharge rates for the two d atasets.
> The insufficiently cleaned dataset resulted in a greater number of retained components and a lower percentage of variance explained Page 52 of 59
> by the first component. (D) Pooled coherence estimates showing reduced coherence across frequencies in the insufficiently cle aned
> dataset, particularly within the delta band. (E) Proportion of common input (PCI) estimated from coherence -versus -CST -size curves.
> The delta -band PCI was substantially reduced in the insufficiently cleaned dataset, whereas alpha -and beta -band PCI estimates were
> comparatively less affected.

The results revealed that all estimates were markedly affected by the presence of a relatively small 

number of insufficiently cleaned MU s, despite representing only 8 of the 31 identified MU s

(approximately 25% of the MU population). For the common drive index, the thresholded common 

drive decreased from (0.59 ± 0.06) in the fully cleaned dataset to (0.50 ± 0.14) in the insufficiently 

cleaned dataset. Similarly, pooled coherence was systematically reduced, with the area under the 

coherence curve in the delta band decreasing from 3.10 to 2.56. The effect was even more pronounced 

for the proportion of common in put index, where the delta -band PCI decreased from 0.8 to 0. 6. In 

contrast, the PCI estimates obtained in the alpha and beta bands showed relatively small changes 

between conditions. Principal component analys is was also substantially affected by MU cleaning. 

In the insufficiently cleaned dataset, parallel analysis identified four components to be retained, with 

the first component explaining 49% of the variance of the smoothed discharge rates. After cleaning 

all MU s, the number of retained components decreased to two, while the variance explained by the 

first component increased to 58%. Therefore, decomposition inaccuracies may artificially increase 

the apparent dimensionality of the MU population while reducin g the amount of variance explained 

by the dominant low -dimensional component. It is important to note that, despite the reduction in the 

amount of variance explained , the first principal component showed highly similar oscillatory 

behavior in both datasets. This finding indicates that the dominant low -dimensional component is 

reasonably robust to decomposition errors, although such errors can substantially alter estim ates of 

dimensionality and explained variance. 

Collectively, these results demonstrate that insufficiently cleaned MU spike trains can substantially 

alter estimates of common synaptic input obtained from both time -domain and frequency -domain 

approaches. The likely mechanism is that decomposition errors introduce spurious discharge events Page 53 of 59 

and missing discharges, effectively reducing the shared fluctuations that these methods aim to 

quantify. Importantly, the observed effects occurred even when the majority of MU s were properly 

cleaned, indicating that a relatively small number of inaccurate MU spike trains can bias population -

level estimates. These findings highlight the importance of careful MU validation and manual 

refinement before estimating common synaptic input. 

One of the main advantages of the current version of openhdemg is that HDsEMG decomposition, 

MU cleaning, and common synaptic input estimation can all be performed within the same integrated 

framework , either from the library or the software . This facilitates the implementation of a complete 

workflow, from the decomposition of HDsEMG signals to the extraction of physiologically 

meaningful estimates of common synaptic input, while maintaining full control over MU quality 

throughout the analysis pipeline. Page 54 of 59 

References 

ADRIAN, E. D. & BRONK, D. W. 1928. The discharge of impulses in motor nerve fibres: Part I. 

Impulses in single fibres of the phrenic nerve. J Physiol, 66 , 81 -101. 

AFSHARIPOUR, B., MANZUR, N., DUCHCHERER, J., FENRICH, K. F., THOMPSON, C. K., 

NEGRO, F., QUINLAN, K. A., BENNETT, D. J. & GORASSINI, M. A. 2020. Estimation 

of self -sustained activity produced by persistent inward currents using firing rate profiles of 

mult iple motor units in humans. J Neurophysiol, 124 , 63 -85. 

AHN, Y. -Y., BAGROW, J. P. & LEHMANN, S. 2010. Link communities reveal multiscale 

complexity in networks. Nature, 466 , 761 -764. 

AMJAD, A. M., HALLIDAY, D. M., ROSENBERG, J. R. & CONWAY, B. A. 1997. An extended 

difference of coherence test for comparing and combining several independent coherence 

estimates: theory and application to the study of motor units and physiological tremor. J

Neurosci Methods, 73 , 69 -79. 

AVRILLON, S., HUG, F., BAKER, S. N., GIBBS, C. & FARINA, D. 2024. Tutorial on MUedit: An 

open -source software for identifying and analysing the discharge timing of motor units from 

electromyographic signals. J Electromyogr Kinesiol, 77 , 102886. 

BAKER, S. N. 2007. Oscillatory interactions between sensorimotor cortex and the periphery. Current 

Opinion in Neurobiology, 17 , 649 -655. 

BAKER, S. N., OLIVIER, E. & LEMON, R. N. 1997. Coherent oscillations in monkey motor cortex 

and hand muscle EMG show task -dependent modulation. J Physiol, 501 ( Pt 1) , 225 -41. 

BAKER, S. N., PINCHES, E. M. & LEMON, R. N. 2003. Synchronization in monkey motor cortex 

during a precision grip task. II. effect of oscillatory activity on corticospinal output. J

Neurophysiol, 89 , 1941 -53. 

BALDISSERA, F., CAVALLARI, P. & CERRI, G. 1998.  Motoneuronal pre -compensation for the 

low -pass filter characteristics of muscle. A quantitative appraisal in cat muscle units. J Physiol, 

511 ( Pt 2) , 611 -27. 

BAWA, P. & STEIN, R. B. 1976. Frequency response of human soleus muscle. J Neurophysiol, 39 ,

788 -93. 

BIGLAND, B. & LIPPOLD, O. C. 1954. Motor unit activity in the voluntary contraction of human 

muscle. J Physiol, 125 , 322 -35. 

BREMNER, F. D., BAKER, J. R. & STEPHENS, J. A. 1991. Correlation between the discharges of 

motor units recorded from the same and from different finger muscles in man. J Physiol, 432 ,

355 -80. 

CABRAL, H. V., COSENTINO, C., RIZZARDI, A., INGLIS, J. G., FUGLEVAND, A. J. & NEGRO, 

F. 2025a. Adaptations in common synaptic inputs to spinal motor neurons during grasping 

versus a less functional hand task.  Journal of Applied Physiology,  139 , 776 -786. 

CABRAL, H. V., CUDICIO, A., BONARDI, A., DEL VECCHIO, A., FALCIATI, L., ORIZIO, C., 

MARTINEZ -VALDES, E. & NEGRO, F. 2024a.  Neural Filtering of Physiological Tremor 

Oscillations to Spinal Motor Neurons Mediates Short -Term Acquisition of a Skill Learning 

Task. eneuro, 11 , ENEURO.0043 -24.2024. 

CABRAL, H. V., INGLIS, J. G., CUDICIO, A., COGLIATI, M., ORIZIO, C., YAVUZ, U. S. & 

NEGRO, F. 2024b. Muscle contractile properties directly influence shared synaptic inputs to 

spinal motor neurons. The Journal of Physiology, 602 , 2855 -2872. 

CABRAL, H. V., INGLIS, J. G., POURREZA, E., DOS SANTOS, M. A., COSENTINO, C., 

O’REILLY, D., DELIS, I. & NEGRO, F. 2025b. A single low -dimensional neural component 

of spinal motor neuron activity explains force generation across repetitive isometric tasks. 

iScience, 28 , 113483. 

CASTRONOVO, A. M., NEGRO, F., CONFORTO, S. & FARINA, D. 2015. The proportion of 

common synaptic input to motor neurons increases with an increase in net excitatory input. J

Appl Physiol (1985), 119 , 1337 -46. Page 55 of 59 

CATTELL, R. B. 1966. The Scree Test For The Number Of Factors. Multivariate Behav Res, 1, 245 -

76. 

CHEN, M. & ZHOU, P. 2016. A Novel Framework Based on FastICA for High Density Surface 

EMG Decomposition. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng, 24 , 117 -27. 

CHRISTAKOS, C. N., PAPADIMITRIOU, N. A. & ERIMAKI, S. 2006. Parallel neuronal 

mechanisms underlying physiological force tremor in steady muscle contractions of humans. 

J Neurophysiol, 95 , 53 -66. 

CONWAY, B. A., HALLIDAY, D. M., FARMER, S. F., SHAHANI, U., MAAS, P., WEIR, A. I. & 

ROSENBERG, J. R. 1995. Synchronization between motor cortex and spinal motoneuronal 

pool during the performance of a maintained motor task in man.  J Physiol,  489 ( Pt 3) , 917 -

24. 

COSENTINO, C., CABRAL, H. V., DOS SANTOS, M. A., POURREZA, E., INGLIS, J. G. & 

NEGRO, F. 2026.  Differential changes in the effective neural drive following new motor skill 

acquisition between vastus lateralis and medialis. European Journal of Applied Physiology .

COVER, T. M. 1999. Elements of information theory , John Wiley & Sons. 

CUNNINGHAM, J. P. & YU, B. M. 2014. Dimensionality reduction for large -scale neural recordings. 

Nature Neuroscience, 17 , 1500 -1509. 

DATTA, A. K. & STEPHENS, J. A. 1990. Synchronization of motor unit activity during voluntary 

contraction in man. J Physiol, 422 , 397 -419. 

DE LA ROCHA, J., DOIRON, B., SHEA -BROWN, E., JOSIĆ, K. & REYES, A. 2007. Correlation 

between neural spike trains increases with firing rate. Nature, 448 , 802 -6. 

DE LUCA, C. J. & ERIM, Z. 1994.  Common drive of motor units in regulation of muscle force. 

Trends Neurosci, 17 , 299 -305. 

DE LUCA, C. J. & FORREST, W. J. 1972. An electrode for recording single motor unit activity 

during strong muscle contractions. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, 19 , 367 -72. 

DE LUCA, C. J., LEFEVER, R. S., MCCUE, M. P. & XENAKIS, A. P. 1982. Control scheme 

governing concurrently active human motor units during voluntary contractions.  J Physiol, 

329 , 129 -42. 

DEL VECCHIO, A., GERMER, C. M., ELIAS, L. A., FU, Q., FINE, J., SANTELLO, M. & FARINA, 

D. 2019.  The human central nervous system transmits common synaptic inputs to distinct 

motor neuron pools during non -synergistic digit actions.  J Physiol,  597 , 5935 -5948. 

DEL VECCHIO, A., HOLOBAR, A., FALLA, D., FELICI, F., ENOKA, R. M. & FARINA, D. 2020. 

Tutorial: Analysis of motor unit discharge characteristics from high -density surface EMG 

signals.  J Electromyogr Kinesiol,  53 , 102426. 

DEL VECCHIO, A., MARCONI GERMER, C., KINFE, T. M., NUCCIO, S., HUG, F., ESKOFIER, 

B., FARINA, D. & ENOKA, R. M. 2023.  The Forces Generated by Agonist Muscles during 

Isometric Contractions Arise from Motor Unit Synergies.  J Neurosci,  43 , 2860 -2873. 

DERNONCOURT, F., AVRILLON, S., LOGTENS, T., CATTAGNI, T., FARINA, D. & HUG, F. 

2025.  Flexible control of motor units: is the multidimensionality of motor unit manifolds a 

sufficient condition? The Journal of Physiology, 603 , 2349 -2368. 

DUCHATEAU, J. & ENOKA, R. M. 2011. Human motor unit recordings: origins and insight into 

the integrated motor system. Brain Res, 1409 , 42 -61. 

ENOKA, R. M. & FARINA, D. 2021. Force Steadiness: From Motor Units to Voluntary Actions. 

Physiology, 36 , 114 -130. 

FARINA, D. & NEGRO, F. 2015. Common synaptic input to motor neurons, motor unit 

synchronization, and force control. Exerc Sport Sci Rev, 43 , 23 -33. 

FARINA, D., NEGRO, F. & DIDERIKSEN, J. L. 2014. The effective neural drive to muscles is the 

common synaptic input to motor neurons. J Physiol, 592 , 3427 -41. 

FARINA, D., NEGRO, F., MUCELI, S. & ENOKA, R. M. 2016. Principles of Motor Unit Physiology 

Evolve With Advances in Technology. Physiology (Bethesda), 31 , 83 -94. Page 56 of 59 

FARMER, S. F., BREMNER, F. D., HALLIDAY, D. M., ROSENBERG, J. R. & STEPHENS, J. A. 

1993. The frequency content of common synaptic inputs to motoneurones studied during 

voluntary isometric contraction in man. J Physiol, 470 , 127 -55. 

GALLET, C. & JULIEN, C. 2011. The significance threshold for coherence when using the Welch's 

periodogram method: Effect of overlapping segments. Biomedical Signal Processing and 

Control, 6, 405 -409. 

GALLOS, L. K., MAKSE, H. A. & SIGMAN, M. 2012. A small world of weak ties provides optimal 

global integration of self -similar modules in functional brain networks. Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences, 109 , 2825 -2830. 

GUTTMAN, L. 1954. Some necessary conditions for common -factor analysis. Psychometrika, 19 ,

149 -161. 

HAGBARTH, K. E. & YOUNG, R. R. 1979. Participation of the stretch reflex in human 

physiological tremor. Brain, 102 , 509 -26. 

HAYTON, J. C., ALLEN, D. G. & SCARPELLO, V. 2004. Factor Retention Decisions in 

Exploratory Factor Analysis: a Tutorial on Parallel Analysis. Organizational Research 

Methods, 7, 191 -205. 

HECKMAN, C. J. & ENOKA, R. M. 2012. Motor unit. Compr Physiol, 2, 2629 -82. 

HOLOBAR, A. & ZAZULA, D. Gradient Convolution Kernel Compensation Applied to Surface 

Electromyograms. In: DAVIES, M. E., JAMES, C. J., ABDALLAH, S. A. & PLUMBLEY, 

M. D., eds. Independent Component Analysis and Signal Separation, 2007// 2007a Berlin, 

Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 617 -624. 

HOLOBAR, A. & ZAZULA, D. 2007b.  Multichannel Blind Source Separation Using Convolution 

Kernel Compensation. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 55 , 4487 -4496. 

HORN, J. L. 1965. A RATIONALE AND TEST FOR THE NUMBER OF FACTORS IN FACTOR 

ANALYSIS. Psychometrika, 30 , 179 -85. 

HOTELLING, H. 1933. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. 

Journal of Educational Psychology, 24 , 417 -441. 

HOTELLING, H. 1936. Relations Between Two Sets of Variates.  Biometrika,  28 , 321 -377. 

HUG, F., AVRILLON, S., DEL VECCHIO, A., CASOLO, A., IBANEZ, J., NUCCIO, S., 

ROSSATO, J., HOLOBAR, A. & FARINA, D. 2021.  Analysis of motor unit spike trains 

estimated from high -density surface electromyography is highly reliable across operators. J

Electromyogr Kinesiol, 58 , 102548. 

HUG, F., AVRILLON, S., IBÁÑEZ, J. & FARINA, D. 2023a. Common synaptic input, synergies 

and size principle: Control of spinal motor neurons for movement generation. The Journal of 

Physiology, 601 , 11 -20. 

HUG, F., AVRILLON, S., SARCHER, A., DEL VECCHIO, A. & FARINA, D. 2023b. Correlation 

networks of spinal motor neurons that innervate lower limb muscles during a multi -joint 

isometric task. J Physiol, 601 , 3201 -3219. 

HYVÄRINEN, A. & OJA, E. 1997. A Fast Fixed -Point Algorithm for Independent Component 

Analysis. Neural Computation, 9, 1483 -1492. 

HYVÄRINEN, A. & OJA, E. 2000. Independent component analysis: algorithms and applications. 

Neural Networks, 13 , 411 -430. 

INCE, R. A., GIORDANO, B. L., KAYSER, C., ROUSSELET, G. A., GROSS, J. & SCHYNS, P. 

G. 2017. A statistical framework for neuroimaging data analysis based on mutual information 

estimated via a gaussian copula. Hum Brain Mapp, 38 , 1541 -1573. 

INGLIS, J. G., CABRAL, H. V., COSENTINO, C., BONARDI, A. & NEGRO, F. 2025. Motor unit 

discharge behavior in human muscles throughout force gradation: a systematic review and 

meta -analysis with meta -regression. Journal of Applied Physiology, 138 , 1050 -1065. 

ISHIZUKA, N., MANNEN, H., HONGO, T. & SASAKI, S. 1979. Trajectory of group Ia afferent 

fibers stained with horseradish peroxidase in the lumbosacral spinal cord of the cat: three 

dimensional reconstructions from serial sections. J Comp Neurol, 186 , 189 -211. Page 57 of 59 

JOLIFFE, I. & MORGAN, B. 1992. Principal component analysis and exploratory factor analysis. 

Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 1, 69 -95. 

KAISER, H. F. 1960. The Application of Electronic Computers to Factor Analysis. Educational and 

Psychological Measurement, 20 , 141 -151. 

KIRKWOOD, P. A. 1979. On the use and interpretation of cross -correlations measurements in the 

mammalian central nervous system. J Neurosci Methods, 1, 107 -32. 

KIRKWOOD, P. A. & SEARS, T. A. 1978. The synaptic connexions to intercostal motoneurones as 

revealed by the average common excitation potential. J Physiol, 275 , 103 -34. 

LAINE, C. M., MARTINEZ -VALDES, E., FALLA, D., MAYER, F. & FARINA, D. 2015. Motor 

Neuron Pools of Synergistic Thigh Muscles Share Most of Their Synaptic Input.  J Neurosci, 

35 , 12207 -16. 

LAINE, C. M., NAGAMORI, A. & VALERO -CUEVAS, F. J. 2016.  The Dynamics of Voluntary 

Force Production in Afferented Muscle Influence Involuntary Tremor. Front Comput 

Neurosci, 10 , 86. 

LAZAR, A. A. & PNEVMATIKAKIS, E. A. 2008. Faithful representation of stimuli with a 

population of integrate -and -fire neurons.  Neural Comput,  20 , 2715 -44. 

LECCE, E., CASOLO, A., NUCCIO, S., FELICI, F. & BAZZUCCHI, I. 2026.  Analysis of motor 

units with high -density surface electromyography: methodological considerations and 

physiological significance. Eur J Appl Physiol, 126 , 61 -86. 

LEMON, R. N. 2008. Descending pathways in motor control.  Annu Rev Neurosci,  31 , 195 -218. 

LEVINE, J., AVRILLON, S., FARINA, D., HUG, F. & PONS, J. L. 2023.  Two motor neuron 

synergies, invariant across ankle joint angles, activate the triceps surae during plantarflexion. 

The Journal of Physiology, 601 , 4337 -4354. 

LIDDELL, E. G. T. & SHERRINGTON, C. S. 1925. Recruitment and some other features of reflex 

inhibition. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Containing Papers of a 

Biological Character, 97 , 488 -518. 

LIPPOLD, O. 1971. Physiological tremor. Sci Am, 224 , 65 -73. 

MADARSHAHIAN, S., LETIZI, J. & LATASH, M. L. 2021.  Synergic control of a single muscle: 

The example of flexor digitorum superficialis. J Physiol, 599 , 1261 -1279. 

MAILLET, J., AVRILLON, S., NORDEZ, A., ROSSI, J. & HUG, F. 2022. Handedness is associated 

with less common input to spinal motor neurons innervating different hand muscles. J

Neurophysiol, 128 , 778 -789. 

MASUDA, T., MIYANO, H. & SADOYAMA, T. 1983. The propagation of motor unit action 

potential and the location of neuromuscular junction investigated by surface electrode arrays. 

Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol, 55 , 594 -600. 

MASUDA, T., MIYANO, H. & SADOYAMA, T. 1985. A surface electrode array for detecting 

action potential trains of single motor units. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol, 60 , 435 -

43. 

MCAULEY, J. H. & MARSDEN, C. D. 2000. Physiological and pathological tremors and rhythmic 

central motor control. Brain, 123 ( Pt 8) , 1545 -67. 

MCISAAC, T. L. & FUGLEVAND, A. J. 2008. Common synaptic input across motor nuclei 

supplying intrinsic muscles involved in the precision grip. Exp Brain Res, 188 , 159 -64. 

MCMANUS, L., FLOOD, M. W. & LOWERY, M. M. 2019. Beta -band motor unit coherence and 

nonlinear surface EMG features of the first dorsal interosseous muscle vary with force. J

Neurophysiol, 122 , 1147 -1162. 

MERLETTI, R., FARINA, D. & GRANATA, A. 1999. Non -invasive assessment of motor unit 

properties with linear electrode arrays. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol Suppl, 50 , 293 -

300. 

MORI, S. 1975. Entrainment of motor -unit discharges as a neuronal mechanism of synchronization. 

Journal of Neurophysiology, 38 , 859 -870. Page 58 of 59 

MUCELI, S., POPPENDIECK, W., HOLOBAR, A., GANDEVIA, S., LIEBETANZ, D. & FARINA, 

D. 2022. Blind identification of the spinal cord output in humans with high -density electrode 

arrays implanted in muscles. Science Advances, 8, eabo5040. 

MUCELI, S., POPPENDIECK, W., NEGRO, F., YOSHIDA, K., HOFFMANN, K. P., BUTLER, J. 

E., GANDEVIA, S. C. & FARINA, D. 2015. Accurate and representative decoding of the 

neural drive to muscles in humans with multi -channel intramuscular thin -film electrodes. J

Physiol, 593 , 3789 -804. 

NEGRO, F. & FARINA, D. 2011a. Decorrelation of cortical inputs and motoneuron output. J

Neurophysiol, 106 , 2688 -97. 

NEGRO, F. & FARINA, D. 2011b. Linear transmission of cortical oscillations to the neural drive to 

muscles is mediated by common projections to populations of motoneurons in humans. J

Physiol, 589 , 629 -37. 

NEGRO, F. & FARINA, D. 2012. Factors influencing the estimates of correlation between motor 

unit activities in humans. PLoS One, 7, e44894. 

NEGRO, F., HOLOBAR, A. & FARINA, D. 2009. Fluctuations in isometric muscle force can be 

described by one linear projection of low -frequency components of motor unit discharge rates. 

J Physiol, 587 , 5925 -38. 

NEGRO, F., MUCELI, S., CASTRONOVO, A. M., HOLOBAR, A. & FARINA, D. 2016a. Multi -

channel intramuscular and surface EMG decomposition by convolutive blind source 

separation. J Neural Eng, 13 , 026027. 

NEGRO, F., YAVUZ, U. & FARINA, D. 2016b. The human motor neuron pools receive a dominant 

slow -varying common synaptic input. J Physiol, 594 , 5491 -505. 

NING, Y., ZHU, X., ZHU, S. & ZHANG, Y. 2015. Surface EMG decomposition based on K -means 

clustering and convolution kernel compensation. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform, 19 , 471 -7. 

NORDSTROM, M. A., FUGLEVAND, A. J. & ENOKA, R. M. 1992. Estimating the strength of 

common input to human motoneurons from the cross -correlogram.  J Physiol,  453 , 547 -74. 

NUCCIO, S., GERMER, C. M., CASOLO, A., BORZUOLA, R., LABANCA, L., ROCCHI, J. E., 

MARIANI, P. P., FELICI, F., FARINA, D., FALLA, D., MACALUSO, A., SBRICCOLI, P. 

& DEL VECCHIO, A. 2024.  Neuroplastic alterations in common synaptic inputs and 

synergistic motor unit clusters controlling the vastii muscles of individuals with ACL 

reconstruction. J Appl Physiol (1985), 137 , 835 -847. 

O'REILLY, D. & DELIS, I. 2022. A network information theoretic framework to characterise muscle 

synergies in space and time. J Neural Eng, 19 , 016031. 

O'REILLY, D. & DELIS, I. 2024. Dissecting muscle synergies in the task space. eLife, 12 , RP87651. 

PEARSON, K. 1901. LIII. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. The London, 

Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 2, 559 -572. 

REUCHER, H., RAU, G. & SILNY, J. 1987.  Spatial Filtering of Noninvasive Multielectrode EMG: 

Part I-Introduction to Measuring Technique and Applications. IEEE Transactions on 

Biomedical Engineering, BME -34 , 98 -105. 

RODRIGUEZ -FALCES, J., NEGRO, F. & FARINA, D. 2017. Correlation between discharge 

timings of pairs of motor units reveals the presence but not the proportion of common synaptic 

input to motor neurons. J Neurophysiol, 117 , 1749 -1760. 

ROSENBERG, J. R., AMJAD, A. M., BREEZE, P., BRILLINGER, D. R. & HALLIDAY, D. M. 

1989. The Fourier approach to the identification of functional coupling between neuronal 

spike trains. Prog Biophys Mol Biol, 53 , 1-31. 

ROSENBERG, J. R., HALLIDAY, D. M., BREEZE, P. & CONWAY, B. A. 1998. Identification of 

patterns of neuronal connectivity --partial spectra, partial coherence, and neuronal interactions. 

J Neurosci Methods,  83 , 57 -72. 

ROSSATO, J., AVRILLON, S., TUCKER, K., FARINA, D. & HUG, F. 2024.  The volitional control 

of individual motor units is constrained within low -dimensional neural manifolds by common 

inputs. The Journal of Neuroscience , e0702242024. Page 59 of 59 

ROSSATO, J., TUCKER, K., AVRILLON, S., LACOURPAILLE, L., HOLOBAR, A. & HUG, F. 

2022. Less common synaptic input between muscles from the same group allows for more 

flexible coordination strategies during a fatiguing task. J Neurophysiol, 127 , 421 -433. 

SEARS, T. A. & STAGG, D. 1976. Short -term synchronization of intercostal motoneurone activity. 

J Physiol, 263 , 357 -81. 

SHERRINGTON, C. S. 1925. Remarks on some aspects of reflex inhibition. Proceedings of the Royal 

Society of London. Series B, Containing Papers of a Biological Character, 97 , 519 -545. 

THOMPSON, C. K., NEGRO, F., JOHNSON, M. D., HOLMES, M. R., MCPHERSON, L. M., 

POWERS, R. K., FARINA, D. & HECKMAN, C. J. 2018. Robust and accurate decoding of 

motoneuron behaviour and prediction of the resulting force output.  J Physiol,  596 , 2643 -2659. 

VALLI, G., RITSCHE, P., CASOLO, A., NEGRO, F. & DE VITO, G. 2024.  Tutorial: Analysis of 

central and peripheral motor unit properties from decomposed High -Density surface EMG 

signals with openhdemg. Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 74 , 102850. 

VELICER, W. F. 1976. Determining the number of components from the matrix of partial 

correlations. Psychometrika, 41 , 321 -327. 

VELICER, W. F., EATON, C. A. & FAVA, J. L. 2000. Construct Explication through Factor or 

Component Analysis: A Review and Evaluation of Alternative Procedures for Determining 

the Number of Factors or Components. In: GOFFIN, R. D. & HELMES, E. (eds.) Problems 

and Solutions in Human Assessment: Honoring Douglas N. Jackson at Seventy. Boston, MA: 

Springer US. 

WELCH, P. 1967. The use of fast Fourier transform for the estimation of power spectra: A method 

based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms. IEEE Transactions on Audio and 

Electroacoustics, 15 , 70 -73. 

ZWICK, W. R. & VELICER, W. F. 1986. Comparison of five rules for determining the number of 

components to retain. Psychological Bulletin, 99 , 432 -442.