Title: Direction and orientation preferences in mouse superior colliculus and its retinal inputs align with topographic axes atop locally mixed tuning

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778v3.full.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 05 Jul 2026 20:38:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
1

# Direction and orientation preferences in mouse superior 

# colliculus and its retinal inputs align with topograph ic axes 

# atop locally mixed tuning 

Zhewen He 1, Mar ía Florencia Gonz ález Fleitas 2, Raikhangul Gabdrashova 2, Sylvia Schröder 1,2 ,* 

> 1

Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK  

> 2

School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QG, UK 

* Correspondence: s.schroeder@sussex.ac.uk 

In mouse superior colliculus (SC), neurons are robustly tuned to motion direction and orientation, but it 

remains controversial whether these preferences are spatially organized , and how this organization relates to 

that found in the retinal input to the S C. We addressed these questions by combining two ‑photon calcium 

imaging of retinal boutons and SC neurons in superficial SC with Neuropixels recordings across the full depth 

of SC. We then asked how direction and orientation preferences depend on visual ‑fi eld location and how tuning 

similar ity among units depend s on lateral and vertical distance in the SC . Retinal boutons were strongly tuned ,

and their preferences closely matched the retinal topographic organization of four motion directions and 

orientations previously described in the retina , rather than a global map in which a single direction or 

orientation dominates each visual -field location . With increasing depth, SC neurons progressively deviated 

from this organization . Superimposed on th e identified topography, local clustering of tuning preferences in 

retinal boutons and SC neurons was weak and confined to very small spatial scales . Together, these results 

show that retinal inputs and neurons in mouse SC represent mul tiple directions and orientations for each 

location in the visual field , likely supporting flexible readout for diverse visually guided behaviors. 

## Introduction 

Visual feature maps in the cortex can range from smoothly organized columns to largely disordere d “salt -and -

pepper” arrangements. In carnivores and primates, orientation and direction preferences in primary visual 

cortex (V1) form orderly maps (Basol e et al., 2003; Hubel and Wiesel, 1968, 1962; Ibbotson and Jung, 2020) ,

whereas in rodent V1, similarly tuned neurons are embedded in a largely salt -and -pepper background with 

only weak local clustering (Kaschube, 2014; Ohki et al., 2005) . While t he SC is the major retinorecipient 

structure in the mouse midbrain and plays a central role in visually -guided orienting, escape, and prey capture 

(Hoy and Farrow, 2025; Wheatcroft et al., 2022) , its functional organization remain s debated (Ahmadlou and 

Heimel, 2015; Chen et al., 2021; De Malmazet et al., 2018; Feinberg and Meister, 2014; Inayat et al., 2015; 

Kasai and Isa, 2021; Li et al., 2020) . Neurons in superficial SC (sSC) are robustly tuned to direction and 

orientation (De Franceschi and Solomon, 2018; Inayat et al., 2015; Ito et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2010) , but it is 

unclear whether their preferences form stereotyped maps across the visual field , are locally mixed , or follow 

another form of spatial organization .

Previous studies have reported conflicting organizations of direction and orientation in mouse SC. Some found 

strong clustering and global structure (Feinberg and Meister, 2014; Li et al., 2020) , including concentric 

orientation maps centere d on the nose (Ahmadlou and Heimel, 2015; De Malmazet et al., 2018) and a

predominant motion direction that reverses near the binocular border (De Malmazet et al., 2018) . Other work 

reported relatively weak or no direction and orientation clustering (Chen et al., 2021; Ina yat et al., 2015; Kasai 

and Isa, 2021) . These discrepancies suggest that the presence, strength, and spatial scale of direction and 

orientation maps in SC may depend on specific experimental conditions .

Importantly, the possible organizations of SC tuni ng are not limited to a binary distinction between salt -and -

pepper tuning and a global map in which each visual -field location is dominated by a single direction or 

orientation preference . Work in the retina has revealed a different form of organization: direction ‑selective 

and orientation ‑selective ganglion cells (DSGCs and OSGCs) align their preferred directions and orientations 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

with multiple position -dependent lines in spherical visual coordinates (Laniado et al., 2025; Sabbah et al., 

2017; Tiriac et al., 2022; Vita et al., 2024) . DSGCs form four main classes whose preferred motion directions 

align with longitudinal lines re lated to optic flow during forward and backward translation and upward and 

downward motion (Sabbah et al., 2017) . OSGCs form an analogous topography, in which preferred orientations 

align with longitudinal or latitud inal lines defined by multiple poles (Laniado et al., 2025) . We refer to the se 

resulting location -dependent model predictions as topographic preferences. Because most retinal ganglion cell 

(RGC) types, including all direction ‑selective types, project retinotopically to sSC (Ellis et al., 2016; Kay et al., 

2011) , this organization provides a concrete alternative to both salt -and -pepper tuning and single -preference 

maps: each visual -field location may receive input encod ing four direction and four orientation preferences .

This distinction between forms of global organization is functionally important. If local SC populations were 

dominated by only one direction or orientation at each visual -field location, information about other directions 

or orientations would be weak or absent locally, limiting the ability to detect behaviorally relevant motion or 

edges in that part of the visual field. Conversely, if multiple directions and orientations are represented locally, 

SC could preserve broad feature coverage at each location. 

Here, we combined two -phot on calcium imaging of retinal boutons and SC neurons in posterior sSC with 

Neuropixels recordings across the full depth of anterior SC. Using receptive -field (RF) mapping, we positioned 

each unit in visual space and compared its preferred direction and ori entation with two sets of predictions 

expected to be consistent across individual animals : those of the retinal topographic model, which predicts 

four direction and four orientation preferences at each visual -field location, and those of a single -preference 

map , in which one direction or orientation dominates each location . We then quantified local clustering and 

examined how alignment to the topographic preferences changed from retinal boutons to SC neurons and with 

depth. Our results show that retinal inputs to SC closely match the topography of multiple direction and 

orientation preferences described in the retina, whereas SC neurons progressively deviate from this 

organization and exhibit locally mixed tuning with weak clustering. 

## Results 

Retinal boutons and sSC neurons are robustly tuned to motion direction and orientation with 

similar cardinal biases 

To compare the functional organization in retinal inputs and SC neurons, we imaged calcium signals in 

synaptic boutons of RGC axons and in neurons in the posterior right SC. In one group of mice, w e expressed a 

synaptically targeted calcium indicator (Dreosti et al., 2009) in RGCs by intravitreal injection of AAV2 -

SyGCaMP6f into the left eye ( Figure 1A) . In another group of mice, we expressed a cytosolic calcium indicator 

(Chen et al., 2013) in neurons in the superficial layers of the right SC by injecti ng AAV1 -GCaMP6f ( Figure 1C) .

To expose the posterior SC representing the top -left peripheral visual field, we used a cylindrical cranial 

implant to displace the transverse sinus without damaging cortex. During two -photon imaging, mice were 

awake and head -fixe d on a treadmill , allowing them to run freely. Recorded movies of calcium signals were 

motion -corrected and segmented into regions of interest (ROIs) with an adapted version of Suite2p (Pachitariu 

et al., 2016) that accounted for lateral and axial brain motion .

We measured tuning to direction of motion and orientation of drifting sinu soidal gratings. Visual stimuli were 

presented on three monitors surrounding the animal, covering −135° to 135° azimuth and −42° to 42° elevation 

(Figure 1B). All stimuli were first defined in spherical visual coordinates and then mapped onto the flat monitor 

surfaces . Gratings moved in 12 directions (30° steps) at a fixed spatial frequency of 0.08 cycles/°, temporal 

frequency of 2 cycles/s, and 100% con trast. For each bouton and neuron, we fitted responses with a single 

temporal kernel aligned to stimulus onset and an independent amplitude per trial, separating responses to the 

current stimulus from residual activity induced by the previous stimulus. Thi s model captured responses well 

(Figure 1D,G; mean ± stan dard deviation ( SD ) explained variance 0.32 ± 0.20 for boutons, 0.44 ± 0.23 for 

neurons), and identified 65% of retinal boutons (2,391/3,677) and 50% of SC neurons (2,378/4,769) as 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Figure 1. Retinal boutons and neurons in the SC were well tuned to motion direction and orientation. 

A. AAV -SyGCaMP6f was delivered to RGCs via intravitreal injection (left). Example average image of retinal boutons in the SC (right) .

B. Visual stimuli were presented on three monitors covering the visual field from −135  to 135  azimuth and −42  to 42  elevation. 

Grating stimuli covered all screens. Stimulus directions —specifically nasal and temporal —were described from the perspective of the left 

eye, because RFs of all recorded units were in the left hemifield. 

C. A AV -GCaMP6f is delivered to SC neurons via injection (right). Example average image of neurons in the SC (left). 

D. Single -trial fluorescence traces (gray) and mean fitted trace s (black) of example boutons (marked in A) in response to sinusoidal 

gratings dr ifting in 12 directions. Gray shading indicates the 2 s stimulus presentations. 

E–F. Direction (E) and orientation (F) tuning curves of example boutons (same as in D), showing single -trial response amplitudes (gray 

dots), mean amplitudes (black dots), and preferred direction/orientation (red triangles). N – nasal , D – down, T – temporal , U – up, V –

vertical, H – horizontal. 

G–I. As in D –F, for example SC neurons (marked in C). 

J–M. Direction (J) and orientation (K) tuning curves of all DS and OS retinal boutons recorded across all sessions, sorted by their 

preferred direction of motion or orientation. Each tuning curve was scaled to a range between 0 and 1. Triangles indicate tun ing curves 

of example boutons from A. Corresponding data for SC n eurons in L and M. 

N–Q. Mean distribution (± SEM) of preferred directions (N) and orientations (O) across 13 and 12 sessions of retinal boutons (red). 

Datasets with fewer than 20 selective units were excluded. Corresponding data for SC neurons (teal) in P and Q (12 sessions each) . For 

comparison, mean distributions of retinal boutons are overlaid (red; same data as in N, O). 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4

responsive to drifting gratings. Based on the fitted amplitudes, we calculated the vector average over all motion 

directions and all o rientations. For both direction and orientation, preference and selectivity were defined as 

the angle and length of the resulting vector ( Figure 1E,F, H,I). This measure of orientation tuning has also been 

termed axis tuning, because it is based on responses to motion along an axis (opposite directions combined) 

rather than to static stimuli. Orientation preferences were consistent across moving and stat ic stimuli (Figure 

S1K,L), so we will use the more common term orientation selectivity . A bouton or neuron was considered 

direction or orientation tuned if its selectivity was significantly larger than zero and had a value of at least 0.1. 

Direction and orientation tuning were not treated as mutually exclusive, because our analyses ask how much 

information about each stimulus feature is present in the response, rather than assigning units to exclusive 

functional classes. 

Retinal boutons and S C neurons were frequently selective to direction or orientation and exhibited a shared 

bias toward cardinal directions and orientations . Among responsive boutons, 25% were direction -selective 

(DS) only, 10% orientation -selective (OS) only, 27% selective to both features, and 38% non -selective ( Figure 

1S). Responsive SC neurons comprised a larger fraction of units selective to both direction and orientation 

(43%), fewer units selective to a single feature (DS -only: 13%; OS -only: 7%), and a similar non -selective 

fraction (37%) ( Figure 1U). In a subset of SC neurons, we also presented moving bars and static gratings and 

found that preferred directions and orientations were highly consistent, confirming that tuning was largely 

invariant to stimulus class (Figure S 1A–L) (Ahmadlou and Heimel, 2015; Inayat et al., 2015) . Across both 

retinal boutons and SC neurons, preferred directions and orientations spanned the full range, bu t were 

overrepresented near cardinal angles (0°, 90°, 180°, 270°;  Figure 1J–M), which was consistent across 

recordings ( Figure 1N–Q) and in line with previous reports in RGCs (Baden et al., 2016; Kerschensteiner and 

Hardesty, 2022; Laniado et al., 2025; Nath and Schwartz, 2016; Sabbah et al., 2017; Tiriac et al., 2022; Vita et 

al., 2024) and SC neurons (Chen et al., 2021; Inayat et al., 2015) . Preferred directions strongly predicted 

preferred orientations ( Figure 1R,T), and median direction selectivity exceeded orientation selectivity 

(boutons: 0.28 vs 0.16; neurons: 0.29 vs 0.19;  Figure 1S,U, Figur e S 1M,N). 

A direct comparison between retinal boutons and SC neurons revealed subtle differences in tuning. Both 

boutons and neurons showed cardinal biases, but boutons displayed a stronger bias toward temporal motion 

(consistent with optic flow during forward locomotion), while SC neurons were more biased toward near -

horizontal orientations ( Figure 1N–Q). Median direction selectivity was similar across populations (0.28 for 

boutons vs 0.29 for neurons; p = 0.61, Wilcoxon rank -sum test; Figure S 1M), whereas median orientation 

selectivity was significantly higher in neurons (0.16 vs 0.19; p = 0.004, Wilcoxon rank -sum test; Fi gure S 1N). 

Together, these results show that retinal boutons and SC neurons in posterior SC share robust direction and 

orientation tuning with cardinal biases, but differ in the balance between directional bias and orientation 

selectivity. 

Retinal t opography of direction and orientation preferences is reflected in superficial SC 

Elegant studies in mouse retina have shown that tuning preferences of DSGCs and OSGCs are sy stematically 

organized in retina -centered spherical coordinates (Laniado et al., 2025; Sabbah et al., 2017) . DS GCs form four 

main classes whose preferred motion directions at each retinal location align with longitud inal lin es defi ned 

by the body axis and the gravitational axis, corresponding to optic flow during forward , backward , upward and 

downward self -motion (Sabbah et al., 2017) (Figure 3A). OS GCs form an analogous spherical topography , in 

which preferred orientations align either with one of two longitudinal fields or two latitudinal fields, that is, 

concentric lines around one of two axes (Laniado et al., 2025) (Figure 3B,C). These retinal studies thus provide 

> R. Preferred direction versus orientation for retinal boutons selective to both features. Example boutons from A marked in co lor.
> S. Direction versus orientation selectivity for all tuned retinal boutons. Example boutons from A marked in color. Insets sh ow
> histograms of selectivity types.
> T, U. As in R and S, for SC neurons.
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

a geometric model that predicts, for any given RF position in visual space, which motion directions and edge 

orientations are preferred by RGCs .

To relate our SC data to this topographic organization of the retina, we first mapped RFs of retinal boutons 

and SC neurons using sparse noise (Figure 2A–F) , wh ich yielded valid RF fit s for the majority of direction - or 

orientation -tuned units (boutons: 85% and 86%; neurons: 66% and 67%). To verify that small eye movements 

had not biased these estimates, we re -fitted RF positions in a subset of sessions for which we recorded pupil 

position, simultaneously estimating a linear transform from pupil displacement to gaze shift in visual degrees 

(Figure S 2.1 A–D). RF center positions were minim ally affected: the median Euclidean distance between 

corrected and uncorrected centers was 0. 55 ° for retinal boutons and 0.71 ° for SC neurons (Figure S 2.1 E–H), 

well below the typ ical RF diameter of ~1 0°. We therefore used uncorrected RF fits for subsequent analyses. 

Because RFs could not be mapp ed for every direction - or orientation -tuned unit, we next asked how well RF 

locations in each imaging field of view (FOV) could be described by a local retinotopic map. For each FOV, we 

fit ted a simple linear retinotopic map that optimally translated, scaled, and rotated the positions of units in 

the FOV to best match their RF locations in vi sual space. The fitted retinotopic maps closely predicted the 

directly mapped RF positions, with average deviations of 2.63° for boutons and 2.93° for neurons, 

corresponding to roughly one quarter of the RF diameter (Figure 2G–J). For SC neurons, this allowed us to 

infer visual -field locations for tuned neurons for which RFs could not be mapped directly . For retinal boutons, 

however, directly mapped RFs covered a more restricted visual -field range, making the retinotopic fits less well 

constrained in some datasets. Subsequent analyses therefore used inferred retinotopic RF locations for SC 

neurons, but only directly fitted RF locations for retinal boutons . The proximity of RFs to monitor edges did 

not systematically affect measured direction or orientation preferences (Liang et al., 2023; Roth et al., 2018) 

Figure 2. RF locations deviated from retinotopy by about one quarter of their diameter.                         

> A. Example average image of retinal boutons in the SC.
> B. ON (top) and OFF (bottom) receptive subfields of 3 example retinal boutons (marked in A). Outlines (center ±1 SD of fitted 2D
> Gaussian) are shown in black. Examples 1 and 2 had significant ON and OFF subfields, while example 3 had only an OFF subfield
> (dashed outline of the ON subfield is shown for reference).
> C. RF outlines for all retinal boutons recorded in session from A. Example boutons marked in color.
> D–F. Same as in A –C, for an example recording of SC neurons (same FOV as in Figure 1C).
> G. Relationship between position in the FOV and RF azimuth (left) or elevation (right) for retinal boutons from the session i n A. The
> colored background gradients represent the best linear fit between FOV and RF positi ons.
> H. Distances between mapped and retinotopic (predicted from FOV position) RF locations for retinal boutons (red) and SC neurons
> (teal). Retinal boutons had slightly smaller distances than SC neurons (medians (triangles): 2.6 and 2.9 for boutons and SC neurons; p
> < 1 e-6, Wilcoxon rank -sum test).
> I. Same as in G, for SC neurons and example session from D.
> J. RF diameters (2 SDs of the fitted Gaussian) across retinal boutons (red) and SC neurons (teal). RFs were fit ted while correc ting for
> eye movements (see Methods ), which modest ly affected RF size but not RF position .SC neurons had slightly but significantly larger RF
> diameters than retinal boutons (medians (triangles): 9. 9and 1 0.0 for boutons and SC neurons; p = 0. 002 , Wilcoxon rank -sum test).
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

(Figure S 2.2 ). Nevertheless , we excluded units with RF centers closer than 5° to any monitor edge from further 

analyses. 

The retinal topographic organization of directions and orientations was largely preserved in retinal boutons 

and partially preserved in SC neurons. For each unit, we projected its RF location onto the axes of the retinal 

geometric model ( Figure 3A–C) and calculated the angular difference between its measured preference and 

the nea rest predicted vector ( Figure 3D–G). We used the median angular difference as the effect -size measure 

of model performance and compared it with two controls : a permuta tion control that preserved the overall 

preference distribution but disrupted its relationship with RF location, and a control in which preferences were 

Figure 3. Topography of direction s and orientation s wa s largely consistent with topography originally 

identified in the retina. 

A–C. Cartoons illustrating the topography of direction preferences (A) of DSGCs and orientation preferences (B, C) of OSGCs for th e left 

eye. Direction preferences align with two axes defining longitudes (A), while orientation preferences align with two axes d efining 

longitudes similar to those for direction (B) and two further axes defining latitudes (C). Dotted rectangle within left visua l field marks 

the part of the visual field that contain s RFs of our data (shown in D –G). 

D–G. Direction (D) and orientatio n (E) preferences of retinal boutons across visual space. Arrows in D point into directions defined by 

the DSGCs longitudes (A). Colored lines in E follow orientations of longitudes (B) and latitudes (C) for OSGCs. Numbers indic ate unit 

count in each polar histogram. Corresponding data for SC neurons in F and G. 

H–K. Ang ular differences between preferences and closest predicted vectors for direction ( H) and orientation ( I) across all tuned retinal 

boutons. The median difference (triangle) of the original data is compared to the median (2.5 –97.5 percentile intervals) expected when 

RF locations were randomly permuted (dark gray) or when preferences were randomly drawn from a uniform distribution (light gr ay). 

Direction: 9.55  original, 1 2.3 –13.7  permuted, 20.9 –24. 2 uniform; orientation: 7. 6 original, 9.5 –11.0  permuted, 1 3.8 –17.0 

uniform. Corresponding data for SC neurons in N and O. Direction: 12. 0 original, 13. 0–14. 4 permuted, 2 0.7 –24. 1 uniform; 

orientation: 10. 0 original, 9. 8–11.2  permuted, 13. 0–15. 8 uniform. 

L–O. Classification of all DS ( L) and OS ( M) boutons according to the closest predicted vector from the geometric model. Each dot 

shows one recording session (dot size reflects total number of boutons); black line indicates median pro portion across sessions. Naming 

follows previous conventions, where DSGC classes were named after the behavior that elicits their responses, e.g., “advance c ells” for 

DSGCs preferring movement in temporal direction. Arrows and lines at the top are example vectors from a central location in D and E. 

Corresponding data for SC neurons in N and O .

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7

drawn from a uniform distribution of angles . In retinal boutons, direction preferences differed from th e nearest 

predicted vectors by a median of 9.5°, smaller than expected under the uniform model (20.9 –24.2°;  Figure 

3D,H) or after permuting RF locations (12.3 –13.7°;  Figure 3H) . This comparison show s that direction 

pre ferences varied systematically with RF position , despite the small variation in model predictions across the 

sampled visual -field region, which makes RF permutation a stringent test of position -dependent alignment. 

Orientation preferences in boutons showed a similar pattern , with a median difference of 7.6°, smaller than 

both the permuted (9.5 –11.0°) and uniform (13.8 –17.0°) controls ( Figure 3E,I). 

Direction preferenc es of SC neurons also followed the geometric predictions , with a median difference of 12. 0°, 

smaller than in permuted (13. 0–14. 4°) and uniform (2 0.7 –24. 1°) controls ( Figure 3F, J). However, SC neurons 

differed more from the predicted directions than retinal boutons (p < 1e -4, Wilcoxon rank -sum test), indicating 

that the retinal topography was already weakened at th e level of sSC neurons. This difference was more 

pronounced for orientation preferences . In SC neurons , the median angular difference of 10. 0° was comparable 

to the permuted control (9. 8–11.2°) , although still smaller than the uniform model (13. 0–15. 8°;  Figure 3G, K),

and significantly larger than in retinal boutons (p = 1e -4, Wilcoxon rank -sum test) . Restricting the analysis to 

DS -only or OS -only units yielded the sa me qualitative picture (Figure S 3). These findings show that retinal 

boutons in posterior SC closely preserve the retinal topography of direction and orientation tuning, while SC 

neurons preserved the topography for direction but deviated fr om that for orientation. Retinal boutons we re 

biased toward temporal motion -preferring cells, whereas SC neurons show ed a more uniform distribution 

across direction classes. We assigned each tuned bouton or neuron to the predicted direction or orientation 

vector closest to its measured preference. For direction, we used the four optic -flow classes defined by Sabbah 

et al. (2017) , for example “advance cells” , whi ch prefer optic flow in temporal direction elicited by forward self -

motion (Figure 3A). Retinal boutons were strongly biased toward the “advance” class ( 30% of direction -tuned 

boutons , Figure 3H), consistent with their stronger bias for temporal stimulus motion in the overall direction 

distribution ( Figure 1N) and with the bias found i n DSGCs (Sabbah et al., 2017) . SC neurons, by contrast, were 

more evenly distributed across direction classes, with 19 –29% of direction -tuned neurons in each class ( Figure 

3J). For orientation, boutons were roughly balanced between horizontal and vertical classes (38 % vs 4 0%; 

Figure 3I), while SC neurons were slightly biased toward horizontal orientation classe s (62% vs 33% ; Figure 

3K). 

Superficial SC and its retinal input lack single -preference map s of direction or orientation 

Smoothed maps of population tuning across visual space lacked systematic gradients, and only r etinal boutons 

showed local tuning consistency above chance. While the previous analyses have revealed a topography of four 

direction and four orientation preferences, we next asked whether there are local biases toward single 

directions or orientation s that could form global maps in the sSC. Visualizing preferred directions and 

orientations at RF locations across all recordings revealed mixtures of preferences at essentially all positions 

(Figure 4A–D). Averaging preferences within circular patches of 10  diameter to construct smoothed maps 

across visual space likewise revealed no systematic gradients or concentric patterns in either boutons or 

neuro ns ( Figure 4E–H). Because patch averages can obscure heterogeneity among individual units, we 

quantified local consistency as the inverse circular var iance of preferences within each patch ( Figure 4I–L). 

Retinal boutons showed substantially higher local consistency than expected from null distributi ons obtained 

by permuting RF locations (direction: 0.4 9 ± 0.001; orientation: 0. 60 ± 0.001; mean ± standard error of the 

mean (SEM);  Figure 4I,J,M,N), and in most individual bouton recordings both direction and orientation 

consistency exceeded the shuffled control ( Figure 4Q,R). In SC neurons, by contrast, local consistency was 

lower (direction: 0.2 2 ± 0.0003; orientation: 0.3 6 ± 0.000 4; mean ± SEM;  Figure 4K,L) and indistinguishable 

from null distributions for both features ( Figure 4O,P). No recording showed elevated direc tion consistency 

and only four recordings showed elevated orientation consistency ( Figure 4S,T). For both retinal boutons and 

SC neurons, consistency w as not trivially explained by the number of units per patch (Figure S 4). The 

somewhat higher tuning consistency in local populations of retinal boutons may be explained by subsets of 

retinal boutons originat ing from the same RGC and th erefore sharing identical tuning. More broadly , t he 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

absence of a consistent direction and orientation map in sSC and the relatively weak tuning consistency among 

boutons and neurons contrasts previous findings, which would predict a clear overrepresentation of near -

vertical orientation preferences and a mix of temporal and upward direction preferences in the posterior SC 

Figure 4. Local populations show ed low consistency of direction and orientation preferences. 

A–D. Direction (A) and orientation (B) preferences for all selective retinal boutons, plotted at their RF locations in visual s pace. 

Corresponding data for SC neurons in C and D. 

E–H. Mean directio n (E) and orientation (F) preferences obtained by averaging across boutons within circular patches of 10° diameter 

in visual space (illustrated by circle in the lower -right corner). Transparency indicates patches with fewer than 20 boutons. 

Corresponding d ata for SC neurons in G and H. 

I–L. Consistency of direction (I) and orientation (J) preferences within 10° patches, quantified as the inverse circular varian ce of 

preferences (same pooling as in E and F) for retinal boutons. Corresponding data for SC neur ons in K and L. 

M–P. Distributions of consistency for direction (M) and orientation (N) across patches (red; at least five units per patch) com pared to 

null distribution obtained by permuting RF locations across boutons (black line: median; gray band: 2.5t h–97.5th percentile interval). 

Corresponding data for SC neurons in O and P. 

Q–T. Mean consistency in direction (Q) and orientation (R) preferences across all patches per recording for retinal boutons (bl ack 

triangles), compared to corresponding null distr ibution for each recording (gray; dot: median; vertical line: 2.5th –97.5th percentile 

interval). Recordings with significant consistency values are marked by a star. Corresponding data for SC neurons in S and T. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 9

(Ahmadlou and Heimel, 2015; De Ma lmazet et al., 2024, 2018; Feinberg and Meister, 2014; Li et al., 2020) ;

these discrepancies are addressed in the Discussion. 

Local functional clustering in sSC is weak and limited to very small spatial scales 

Pairs of retinal boutons showed more similar tuning preferences than pairs of SC neurons. In example FOVs ,

preferences of bouton s and neu ron s showed intermingled directions and orientations without obvious clusters 

(Figure 5A–D). When we considered all pairs of simultaneously recorded units, pairwise di fferences were 

smaller than expected for a uniform distribution of preferences (90° for direction, 45° for orientation) but still 

Figure 5. Pai rwise similarity of direction and orientation tuning wa s largely independent of lateral 

distance. 

A–D. Examples of direction (A) and orientation (B) preferences of individual retinal boutons in one FOV. Each bouton is plotted at its 

imaging location; non -responsive boutons are shown in dark gray and non -selective boutons in light gray. Corresponding data for SC 

neurons in C and D. Neurons from four imaging planes are shown. 

E–H. Pairwise difference in direction (E) and orientation (F) preferences as a function of lateral distance in the SC (depth ig nored) for 

all pairs of simultaneously recorded retinal b outons (dots colored by density). Mean difference as a function of distance (red) is 

compared to the null distribution obtained by permuting bouton locations (black line: median; gray band: 2.5th –97.5th percentile 

interval). For comparison, mean pairwise d ifference of SC neurons is overlaid (teal; same data as in G, H). Corresponding data for SC 

neurons in G and H. Insets show zoom -in. 

I–L. Mean pairwise difference in direction (I) and orientation (J) preference for each recording ( gray lines, at least 15 s elective units 

each) as a function of distance, normalized to the null distribution of that recording. Mean (horizontal black line) and ±3 S EMs ( gray 

shade) of the null distribution are shown for comparison. Example recordings from A and B are shown as dot ted lines; mean across all 

recordings depicted as bold black line. Corresponding data for SC neurons in K and L. 

M–P. Mean pairwise difference in direction (M) and orientation (N) preference for each recording (at least 15 selective units e ach) as a 

functi on of FOV size (length of diagonal). Example from A and B shown in red. Corresponding data for SC neurons in O and P. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 10 

large: mean differences were ~75° for direction and 3 2° for orientation among boutons, and ~8 9° and 4 2°

among neurons ( Figure 5E–H). 

Pairwise t uning differences showed only weak dependence on lateral distance and departed from chance levels 

only for very close pairs. Pairwise differences as a function of lateral distance in the SC closely followed null 

distributions obtained by randomly permuting unit locations within each FOV (Figure 5E–H). For retinal 

boutons, only pairs separated by 10 m had direction and orientation preferences that were clearly more 

sim ilar than expected from the null distribution (Figure 5E,F). For SC neurons, elevated similarity was 

restricted to pairs within <12 m, with orientation differences remaining slightly below the null distribution 

up to ~1 30 m but with a very small absolute deviation ( <2°;  Figure 5G,H). Across recordings, this weak 

clustering at very short distances remained detectable for boutons but was rare for neurons ( Figure 5I–L). 

Because bouton recordings covered smaller FOVs than neuron recordings, we tested whether FOV size could 

explain the higher similarity among boutons. This was not the case. Mean pairwise differences in bouton 

recordings showed no systematic relationship with FOV size, and some bouton recordings exhibited mean 

Figure 6. Electrophysiological recordings across SC depth confirm ed the lack of functional clustering. 

A. Visual stimuli were presented on a single monitor covering −95° to 0° azimuth and −27° to 51° elevation. Drifting grating stimuli 

covered the full screen. 

B. Neuropixels probes were used to record single units from sSC (light gray) and dSC (dark gray). 

C. Single -trial (gray) and mean (black) spike rate traces of example units in response to sinusoidal gratings drifting in 12 directions .

Grating presentations (2 s each) are indicated by gray shading. 

D, E. Direction (D) and orientation (E) tuning curves f or example units in C, showing single -trial response amplitudes ( gray dots), mean 

amplitudes (black dots), and preferred directions and orientations if significantly tuned (red triangles). 

F, G. Mean distribution (± SEM) of preferred directions (F) and ori entations (G) across all recording sessions. Datasets with fewer than 

10 selective units were excluded. 

H. Preferred direction of all recorded units, as a function of depth in SC for each recording session (multiple sessions per animal). 

I. Direction selec tivity of all units as a function of depth in SC. 

J, K. Same as in H and I, for orientation tuning. For comparison, direction selectivity profile (green) from I is overlaid in K. 

L. Mean of pairwise direction difference of each recording (dots), compared t o corresponding null distribution (gray line: median; light -

gray box: 2.5th –97.5th percentile interval). 

M. Pairwise difference in direction preference as a function of depth separation in SC for all pairs of simultaneously record ed units (dots 

colored by density). Mean difference as a function of separation (teal) is compared to null distribution obtained by permuting unit 

depths (black line: median; gray band: 2.5th –97.5th percentile interval). 

N, O. Same as in L and M, for orientation tuning. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11 

differences as large as those in neuron recordings with FOVs at least four times bigger ( Figure 5M–P). This 

weak clustering persisted when we measured distances in visual space rather than in FOVs , and when we used 

different visual stimul i. When we considered pairwise differences as a function of RF distance, bouton and 

neuron pairs showed the same pattern, with deviations from chance confined to RF pairs within a few degrees 

(Figure S 5A–D). Pairwise tuning differences derived from moving bars or static gratings were similar to those 

for drifting gratings (Figure S 5E–G). 

Tuning across SC depth was heterogeneous and weakly related to the retinal topography 

Neuropixels recordings across the full depth of the SC revealed robust tuning to motion direction and 

orientation . We recorded spiking activity using Neuropixels probes inserted vertically through the full depth 

of t he SC in an experimental setup similar to the two -photon imaging experiments ( Figure 6A,B). Single units 

were isolated by automatic spike sorting using Kilosort 2.5 (Pachitariu et al., 2024) and quality metrics followed 

by manual curation . T he border between sSC and deep SC (dS C) was determined from visually evoked local 

field potentials , current source density , and histolog y (Figure S 6A–C). Around 58% of responsive neurons in 

the SC were well tuned ( Figure 6C–E, I,K ) and the population was biased towards cardinal directions and 

Figure 7. Retinal topography wa s progressively weakened from superficial to deep SC. 

A. ON and OFF RFs of four example units. RF outlines (center ± 1 SD of fitted 2D Gaussian) shown in black. 

B. RF outlines of all units recorded in one session, including examples in A (colored). 

C. Depth distribution of units with RFs from B. Depths were a ligned to the border between sSC and dSC. 

D, E. Direction (D) and orientation (E) preferences of SC units across visual space, plotted at their mapped RF locations (no t

retinotopic). Arrows in D point along directions defined by DSGC longitudes (see  Figure 3A). Colored lines in E indicate orientations of 

longitudinal and latitudinal fields for OSGCs (see  Figure 3B,C). Numbers indicate population size in each polar histogram. The depicted 

region of visual space in E includes two poles of the spherical axes: one for horizontal longitudes (cyan circle) and one for vertical 

latitudes (r ed circle). 

F–I. Classification of all DS units in sSC (F) and dSC (G) according to closest predicted direction vector. Each dot shows one recording 

session (dot size reflects total number of units); black line indicates median proportion across sessions. Arrows at t he t op illustrate 

example predicted vectors from a central location in D. Corresponding data for OS units in H and I. 

J–M. Angular differences between measured direction preferences and the closest predicted vectors in sSC (J) and dSC (K). The m edian 

difference (triangle) is compared to the distribution obtained by permuting RF locations (dark gray: median; band: 2.5th –97.5th 

percentile interval) and to a uniform preference model (light gray: median; band: 2.5th –97.5th percentile interval). sSC: 18. 2 original, 

16.4–21.0 permuted, 1 9.2 –26.5  uniform; dSC: 2 5.9  original, 1 6.3 –26.5  permuted, 1 5.7 –30.7  uniform. Corresponding data for 

OS units in L and M. sSC: 14.8  original, 12.5 –16.2  permuted, 1 1.6 –17. 8 uniform; dSC: 1 3.6  original, 1 1.1 –18.0  permuted, 1 0.6 –

19.8  uniform. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12 

orientations ( Figure 6F,G) . Pref erred directions were strongly correlated with preferred orientations ( Figure 

S6D) . Direction selectivity in sSC was generally higher than orientation selectivity ( Figure 6K), while, across 

all depths, OS units were more numerous than DS units ( Figure S 6E). 

Direction and orientation preferences showed no consistent pattern with SC depth. When pref erred directions 

and orientations were sorted by depth within each recording , no systematic trend or layering was revealed 

(Figure 6H,J ), even though RF s of simultaneously recorded neurons largely overlapped ( Figure 7A,B) .

Quantitative ly, median pairwise tuning differences were close to the values expected for a uniform distribution 

of preferences (90° for direction, 45° for orientation) and rarely deviated from the medians obtained after 

randomly permuting units across recordings ( Figure 6L,N ). Pairwise differences were also independent of 

distance in depth between neurons: mean tuning differences as a function of depth separation closely followed 

null distributions based on permuted depths for both direction and orientation ( Figure 6M,O ). 

Direction and orientation tuning across the depth of SC showed little resemblance to the retinal spherical 

topography. As before, we located RFs of recorded neurons within the visual field ( Figure 7A–C). When we 

compared S C tuning to the geometric model derived from retinal RGCs (Laniado et al., 2025; Sabbah et al., 

2017) , the match between measured and predicted preferences in sSC was weaker than in retinal boutons 

(Figure 3) and weakest for dSC neurons (Figure 7D–M). In particular, direction and orientation preferences of 

dSC neurons showed no alignment with the predicted retinal vectors , which was as weak as expected by 

uniform distributions of pref erences (Figure 7L,M ). Together, these results are consistent with increasing 

integration across diverse retinal inputs as one moves away from the retinal input. We n oticed that the 

distribution s of direction and orientation classes recorded in sSC using electrophysiology (Figure 7F,H) appear 

to be different from the distributions in imaged sSC neurons ( Figure 3J,K ). This may be explained by the 

difference in RF locations , differences in recorded depth ( imaging is biased to the most superficial sSC), or 

individual differences across mice. 

## Discussion 

Our results demonstrate that the topographic organization of direction and orientation tuning previously 

described in the retina is reflected in retinal input to the mouse SC and is progressively transformed within SC. 

Us ing two -photon calcium imaging of retinal boutons and SC neurons in posterior monocular SC , together 

with Neuropixels recordings across the depth of anterior binocular SC, we found robust tunin g and shared 

cardinal biases in both retinal inputs and neurons. Retinal boutons closely followed geometric model s derived 

from retinal organization, which predict four direction and orientation preferences at each visual -field location 

based on longitude - and latitude -like lines across visual space (Laniado et al., 2025; Sabbah et al., 2017) . The 

alignment to the geometric model decreased from retinal boutons to s uperficial neurons and further to deep 

neurons . Local clustering of tuning was weak in all neural populations and confined to very small spatial scales 

(10 –20 μm) , while tuning preferences across visual space lacked smooth gradients and stereotyped global 

patterns. 

Maps or no maps? 

Pairwise differences in preferred direction between SC neurons in our data were largely independent of lateral 

distance, and consistency of preferences within 100 -μm neighborhoods was at chance. These finding s agree 

with some studies (Chen et al., 2021; Inayat et al., 2015) , but disagree with reports of local clustering of either 

direction or orientation preferences (Ahmadlou and Heimel, 2015; De Malmazet et al., 2018; Feinberg and 

Meister, 2014; Kasai and Isa, 2021; Li et al., 2020) . But among cluster - or map -positive studies, th e strength 

of pairwise differences varied markedly: for pairs <100 μm apart, median direction differences were ~40° in 

some studies (De Malmazet et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020) versus ~80° in others (Kasai and Isa, 2021) , and median 

orientation differences ranged from ~30° (Feinberg and Meister, 2014; Kasai and Isa, 2021) to <10° (De 

Malmazet et al., 2018) . At the level of retinal inputs, nearby boutons were reported to have almost identical 

orientation preferences and more homogeneous direction tuning than in our data (De Mal mazet et al., 2024) ,

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

whereas we observed clear clustering only within ~10 μm, plausibly reflecting multiple boutons from single 

RGCs (Hong et al., 2011) .

Inconsistencies among previous reports are even more pronounced at the level of global maps. For direction, 

different studies emphasized a predominance of upward motion , upward -anterior motion, or opposing 

posterior/anterior biases in monocular versus binocular SC (Ahmadlou and Heimel, 2015; De Malmazet et al ., 

2018; Dräger and Hubel, 1975; Li et al., 2020) . For orientation, neurons near the center of the visual field were 

described as horizontally biased or largely non -selective (Ahmadlou and Heimel, 2 015; De Malmazet et al., 

2018) . Proposed map layouts range from concentric orientation maps centered on the nose to ~30° -wide 

patches of similar orientation without global structure (Ahmadlou and Heimel, 2015; De Malmazet et al., 2018; 

Fei nberg and Meister, 2014) , and large differences across individual animals are evident within single studies 

(e.g., Figure S3 in De Malmazet et al., 2018; Figure 6C in Li et al., 2020) . Against this heterogeneous 

background, our observation of broadly distributed, weakly clustered preferences suggests that strong, 

stereotyped map s are unlikely to be a universal organizing principle of SC. 

Several factors may contribute to the discrepancies across studies. Some focused on anterior SC and the 

binocular/monocular border, others on more posterior monocular regions, yet both map -like a nd salt -and -

pepper organizations have been reported in both zones, so retinotopic location alone cannot explain the 

differences. Visual stimuli varied widely (drifting or static gratings, moving bars, dots), distortions from 

presenting spherical coordinate s on flat screens were not always corrected, and some RF estimates were based 

on response delays of DS units to moving bars, which can misplace RFs and thus inferred maps (De Malmazet 

et al., 2024, 2018) . Stimulus apertures or monitor edges may also contribute, because RF overlap with stimulus 

boundaries can induce apparent orientation preferences and, in sSC , stimulus -dependent orientation and 

direction columns (Borges et al., 2025; Liang et al., 2023; Roth et al., 2018; Yaakov et al., 2025) . However, 

such effects should be strongest for RFs near monitor edges and should induce preferences with a predictable 

relationship to boundary orientation, for example horizontal orientation preferences near vertical edges. They 

are therefore unlikely to explain all reported map layouts, including concentric o rientation maps or large -scale 

direction biases toward upward, nasal, or temporal motion. In our data, preferred directions and orientations 

showed no systematic dependence on RF distance to monitor edges. Most experiments used awake animals, 

but internal state mainly modulates gain rather than preferred direction or orientation (Chen et al., 2021; Ito 

et al., 2017; Savier et al., 2019; Schröder et al., 2020) , making it an unlikely source of disagreement. Finally, 

biases in cell -type sampling are plausible if stimuli drive onl y a minority of neurons, implying that different 

functional subpopulations were emphasized. 

A partial resolution emerges when considering the four direction and orientation preferences predicted by the 

retinal topographic organization to vary smoothly across visual space (Laniado et al., 2025; Sabbah et al., 

2017) . This framework does not fall neatly onto a binary distinction between salt -and -pepper organization and 

single -preference maps. Instead, it predicts a third form of organization: multiple topographic preferences are 

represented at each visual -field location . The topographic organization encompasses concentric orientation 

layouts near the front , in addition to other geometries proposed in previous studies . Systematic or random 

shifts in the relative strength s of these direction and orientation channels across animals, recording methods, 

or stimulus sets could make one channel dominate over others and thereby produce an apparent single -

preference map. 

Moreover, some studies analyzed DS and OS populations separately and reported strong structure within, but 

ran dom mixing between, these groups (De Malmazet et al., 2024, 2018) . Given that neurons with both 

direction and orientation selectivity typic ally exhibit approximately orthogonal preferences, pooling DS and 

OS populations and includ ing neurons selective to both features will naturally yield more heterogeneous local 

preference distributions , with broader local coverage of stimulus directions and orientations rather than 

domina nce of a single preference at each visual -field location .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Retinal topography wa s progressively transformed by collicular circuits 

Retinal boutons in sSC closely followed the topographic models of DSGCs and OSGCs (Laniado et al., 2025; 

Sabbah et al., 2017; Tiriac et al., 2022) . This is expected because 85 –90% of RGCs, including all four cardinal 

DSGC types, project to SC (Ellis et al., 2016; Kay et al., 2011) , their terminals predominantly target the 

superficial layers that we im aged (Dhande and Huberman, 2014; Hong et al., 2011; Huberman et al., 2009) ,

and their projections follow strict retinotopy (Molotkov et al., 2023; Sibille et al., 2022) . Our RF measurements 

confirmed this tight retinoto pic alignment. 

In sSC neurons, the topographic organization remained evident for direction but was weaker for orientation. 

Direction selectivity and preferred direction in SC are largely inherited from DSGCs and amplified by similarly 

tuned intracollicular inputs (Shi et al., 2017; Sibille et al., 2022) , while some DS neurons in SC also receive 

input from non -DSGCs (Kay and Triplett, 2017) . Axis -selective responses may be inherited from OSGCs, or 

may arise from convergent innervation by oppositely tuned DSGCs or local SC circuits (Kay and Triplett, 2017) .

Our finding that direction preferences of superficial n eurons remained well aligned with the retinal 

topography , whereas orientation preferences deviated more than in boutons, is therefore consistent with a 

largely preserved feedforward scaffold for direction combined with mixing of multiple retinal channels a nd 

local circuitry that blurs topographic orientation organization at the single -neuron level. The weaker 

agreement with the topographic organization in Neuropixels -recorded superficial neurons likely reflects 

undersampling of the most superficial sSC laye r, which is preferentially targeted by DSGCs. 

In dSC, we found almost no agreement with the retinal topographic organization despite robust tuning. 

Functional classifications in previous studies identified “RGC -like” neuron types that predominate in sSC an d

more “SC -specific” types that become more prominent with depth (Lee et al., 2020; Li and Meister, 2023) ,

consistent with increasing transformation away from retinal channels. This transformation in dSC is expected 

given further functional integration within SC and the convergence of signals from ot her sources, including 

cortical and brainstem structures (Cang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2022; Wheatcroft et al., 2022) . Together, these 

results support a hierarchical view in which a retinally derived topographic organization is preserved in retinal 

boutons , but increasingly mixed across SC layers .

Parallels with mouse V1 : local mixing rather than single -preference map s

Several aspects of the organization we observed in mouse SC parallel that in mouse V1. In both areas, neurons 

are arranged in precise retinotopic maps and are robustly tuned to orientation and direction, yet nearby 

neurons do not form classical columns domi nated by a single preference (Bonin et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2021; 

Inayat et al., 2015; Kaschube, 2014; Niell and Stryker, 2008) . Instead, preferences are locally mixed, with only 

weak clustering at shor t distances. In V1 , such clustering occurs on the scale of tens to hundreds of micrometers 

for orientation and, more modestly, for direction (Kondo et al., 2016; Ringach et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2025) ,

comparable to the very small -scale clustering we found in SC. Local orientation biases in V1 have been linked 

to ON/OFF RF tiling in the retina (Jimenez et al., 2018) , whereas SC may achieve better local coverage by 

receiving direction tuning from DSGCs and orientation tuning f rom OSGCs , or from pooling oppositely tuned 

DSGCs. 

Theoretical accounts of map formation suggest that the absence of single -preference columns is expected in 

mouse SC. Across species, rodents and rabbits exhibit locally mixed tuning, whereas cats, ferrets, and primates 

display columnar maps (Kaschube, 2014) , though not for all visual features (Martin and Schröder, 2013; Yen 

et al., 2007) . Models based on the ratio of retinal inputs to cortical area —the mapping or sampling ratio —

predict that low ratios favor a locally mixed organization, wherea s high ratios favor columnar maps (Ibbotson 

and Jung, 2020; Jang et al., 2020; Najafian et al., 2022; Schmidt and Wolf, 2021) . Published estimates place 

SC in a low -mapping -ratio regime: a larger fraction of RGCs projects to SC than to the thalamocortical pathway 

(Ellis et al., 2016; Martin, 1986) , SC RFs are smaller than those in V1 (Niell and Stryker, 2008; Wang et al., 

2010) , and SC has a smalle r surface area (Edwards et al., 1986; Mazade and Alonso, 2017) . The same 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

anatomical constraints that argue against classical columnar maps in mouse V1 therefore also argue against 

single -preference maps in SC. 

Functional implications and future directions 

Biases toward directions aligned with body and gravity axes likely facilitate decoding of self -motion and 

ethologically relevant motion (Sabbah et al., 2017; Tiriac et al., 2022) , whereas local mixing allows SC to 

represent many motion direction s or edge s at each location and support diverse behaviors (Hoy an d Farrow, 

2025; Wheatcroft et al., 2022) . The spherical organization of OSGCs has been proposed to make it easy for a 

downstream decoder to infer edge orientation from the relative activity of a few OSGC types (Laniado et al., 

2025) . In the binocular zone, the vertical cell type of the longitudinal system and the horizontal type of the 

latitudinal system provide the highest decoding efficiency (Laniado et al. , 2025) . These two classes were the 

most common among sSC neurons recorded with Neuropixels in the binocular zone (Figure 7). This 

convergence indicates that SC neurons in the binocular zone preferentially represent particularly informative 

retinal orientation channels, even though the se preferences remain weakly clustered at the neuronal level .

Future work should extend these measurements to larger SC populations while preserving circuit integrity. 

Ideally, this would combine broad retinotopic coverage, including anterior/binocular and 

posterior/monocular SC, with single -cell resolution. Optical methods are attractive but usually require 

removal of overlying cortex, which risks altering cortical input or damaging sSC; deep imaging approaches that 

access SC without cortical removal would therefore be especially valu able. New experiments should also 

quantify variability across individuals, given the substantial inter -animal differences reported previously, and 

test how organization generalizes to richer stimulus conditions. Natural images and movies, motion -contrast 

stimuli, and size - or context -dependent motion could reveal structure not engaged by simple gratings and bars 

(DePiero et al., 2024) . Finally, re lating SC organization to behavior —for example, by testing whether directions 

and orientations near overrepresented preferences are discriminated more accurately, or whether mice move 

head or eyes to bring stimuli into specific visual -field regions —will be useful to link the topographic 

organization in retina and SC to behavioral performance .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

## Acknowledgements 

We thank Profs Matteo Carandini (MC) and Kenneth D. Harris (KDH) for support of this project in their 

laboratory during data acquisition; we thank Charu Reddy and Charlotte Donald Wilson for help with mouse 

husbandry; we thank Michael Krumin for help with performing two -photon imaging experiments and Liad J. 

Baruchin for help with performing electrophysi ological recordings ; we thank Shai Sabbah for information 

provided regarding his geometrical model of retinal direction and orientation tuning ; we thank Dr Luigi 

Federico Rossi and Prof Matteo Carandini for valuable feedback on the manuscript. 

This work was supported by the People Programme (Marie Curie Actions) of the European Union’s Seventh 

Framework Programme (FP7/2007 -2013) under REA Grant Agreement No 62387 2 (to SS), by the 

Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BB/P003273/1 to MC and SS , BB/W014955/1 to SS ), 

by Wellcome Trust grants (095669 and 205093 to MC and KDH), by a Sir Henry Dale Fel lowship jointly 

funded by the Wellcome Trust and the Royal Society (220169/Z/20/Z to SS) , by a Newton International 

Fellowship funded by the Royal Society ( NIF \R1 \211581 to MFGF) , and by the Leverhulme Trust (doctoral 

fellowship to RG) . For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to 

any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. 

## Author contributions 

Conceptualization and design: S.S. ; data collection – two -photon imaging: S.S .; data collection and pre -

processing – electrophysiology: M.F.G.F. , R.G. ; data analysis: S.S. and Z.H. ; writing: S.S. ; review and editing 

of manuscript: Z.H., M.F.G.F., R.G. 

## Data and code availability 

The pre -processed data used in this study are available at  https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.30927041 ;

code used to analyze pre -processed data is available at  https://github. com/Schroeder -Lab/he -et -

al_2025_tuning -topography . The raw data are available on reasonable request. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

## Methods 

Experimental Model and Subject Details 

All procedures were conducted in accordance with the UK Animals Scientific Procedures Act (1986) under 

personal and project licenses released by the Home Office following appropriate ethics review. 

For two -photon imaging, we used 1 inbred C57Bl/6J ( www.jax.org/strain/000664 ; 1 male) and 12 mice (7 

females, 5 males) obtained by crossing Gad2 -IRES -Cre (www.jax.org/strain/ 010802 ) and Ai9 

(www.jax.org/strain/ 007909 ). The heterozygous offspring expressed TdTomato in g lutamate decarboxylase 

2-positive (GAD2+) cells to identify inhibitory neurons. For electrophysiological recordings, we used 4 Vgat -

IRES -Cre mice (www.jax.org/strain/016962 ; 2 females, 2 males ) and mice (1 female, 2 males) obtained by 

crossing Vgat -IRES -Cre ( www.jax.org/strain/016962 ) and Ai14 ( www.jax.org/strain/007908 ). Animals were 

9–29 weeks old at the time of surgery and were used for experiments up to the age of 54 weeks. Mice were kept 

on a 12 -h light: 12 -h dark cycle. Most animals were single housed after the first surgery. 

Overview of collected data 

Retinal boutons (2P)  SC neurons (2P)  SC neurons (ephys) 

Animals  8 5 7

Recording sessions  17  12  23 

Recorded units  3,677  4,769  1,474 

Units responsive to 

drifting gratings 

2,391  2,378  1,120 

Selective units  603 DS -only; 

232 OS -only; 

643 DS & OS 

315 DS -only; 

166 OS -only; 

1,022 DS & OS 

12 4 DS -only; 

358 OS -only; 

165 DS & OS 

Units for which RFs 

could be mapped 

1,979 of 3,282 recorded 

units (13 sessions, 8 

animals) 

2,471 of 4,769 

recorded units (12 

sessions, 5 animals) 

539 of 1,120 recorded 

units (23 sessions, 7 

animals) 

Units with RF and 

tuned to direction or 

orientation 

674 (of 1, 009 DS); 

591 (of 769 OS) 

813 (of 1, 337 DS); 

697 (of 1, 188 OS) 

172 (of 289 DS); 

244 (of 5 23 OS) 

Surgical procedures 

Surgical procedures for animals undergoing two -photon imaging were described previously (Schröder et al., 

2020) . Here, we provide a shorter description and point out differences to animals undergoing 

electrophysiological experiments. Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane and the follo wing drugs were 

administered subcutaneously: carprofen (5 mg/kg; Rimadyl, Pfizer) and dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg; 

Colvasone, Norbrook) in animals undergoing surgery for two -photon imaging experiments (2P); or meloxicam 

(5 mg/kg; Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim ), buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg; Vetergesic, Ceva Animal Health), 

and dexamethasone (4 mg/kg; Rapidexon, Dechra) in animals undergoing surgery for electrophysi ology 

experiments (ephys) . The scalp was shaved and disinfected, and local analgesia ( 2P: lidocaine : 6 mg/kg, 

Hameln pharmaceuticals ltd ; ephys: bupivacaine: 7 mg/kg , Marcain , Astra Zeneca ) was injected 

subcutaneously under the scalp prior to the incision. Eyes were covered with eye -protective gel 

(Chloramphenicol, Martindale Pharmaceuticals Ltd). A local anesthetic (2P: 5% Lidocaine ointment , TEVA 

UK ; ephys: 5% EMLA cream, Aspen ) was applied to the ear bars, before the animal was placed into a stereotaxic 

apparatus . The skin covering and surrounding the area of interest was removed, and the skull w as cleaned of 

connective tissue. A custom made headplate was positioned above the area of interest and attached to the bone 

with Superbond C&B (Sun Medical). Throughout all surgical procedures, the animal was kept on a heating pad 

to stabilize body tempera ture at 37°C. Subcutaneous injections of 0.01 ml/g/h of Sodium Lactate (Hartmann’s 

solution) were given. After the surgery, the animal was placed into a cage on a heating pad (37°C) for recovery 

from anesthesia . Mice were given three days to recover while being treated with Carprofen or Metacam .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

To image retinal boutons in SC, we cloned a variant of GCaMP6f fused with a localization signal targeting 

synaptic terminals (SyGCaMP6f) and packaged it into an AAV2/2 vector (Addgene, 51085) so that GCaMP 

expression was restricted to boutons (Dreosti et al., 2009) . We injected approximately 3 μl of 

AAV2/2.hSyn1.SyGCaMP6f.SV40 with a concentration of 2.44 × 10 12 viral particles/ml into the vitreous humor 

of the left eye. In all animals used for two -photon imagi ng, a circular 4 mm craniotomy (centered at 

approximately -4.2 mm AP and 0.5 mm ML from Bregma) was made . For two -photon imaging of activity in 

SC neurons, we injected the virus AAV2/1.Syn.GCaMP6f.WPRE.SV40 (Chen et al., 2013) at a final 

concentration of 2.30 –4.39e12 GC/ml , at a rate of 2.3 nl every 6 s (Nanoject II, Drummond), below the surfa ce 

of the right SC. As the posterior SC is covered by a large sinus running through the dura, we implanted a 

custom -made implant permanently to push the sinus anteriorly and gain optical access to the SC. The implant 

was fixed to the skull with Vetbond (3M) and Superbond C&B (Sun Medical). 

For electrophysiological recordings, a craniotom y (centered at -3.7 mm AP and 0.6 mm ML relative to Bregma, 

in the right hemisphere) was performed above the anterior SC at least one day before the first acute recording 

was performed .

Two -photon imaging 

Most of the two -photon imaging datasets have been used in a previ ous study (Schröder et al., 2020) , and 

additional datasets have been collected in the same way. Shortly, t wo -photon imaging was performed using a 

standard resonant microscope (B -Scope, ThorLabs Inc.) equipped with a 16x, 0.8 NA water immersion 

objective (N16XLWD -PF, Nikon) and controlled by ScanImage 4.2 (Pologruto et al., 2003) . Excitation light at 

970 –980 nm was delivered by a femtosecond laser (Chameleon U ltra II, Coherent). Multi -plane imaging was 

performed using a piezo focusing device (P -725.4CA PIFOC, Physik Instrumente, 400 μm range ). Laser power 

was depth -adjusted and synchronized with piezo position using an electro -optical modulator (M350 -80LA, 

Cono ptics Inc.). Emission light was collected using two separate channels, one for green fluorescence (525/50 

nm emission filter) capturing the calcium transients and one for red fluorescence (607/70 nm emission filter). 

For imaging neurons in SC, we used 3 –4 imaging planes separated by 9 –30 μm at depths of 15 –100 μm from 

the surface of SC. The field of view spanned 340 –640 μm in both directions at a resolution of 512 x 512 pixels. 

The frame rate per plane was 6.0 –7.5 Hz. 

For imaging retinal boutons in SC we used 5 or 10 imaging planes (with 3 or 6 fly -back planes) with an inter -

plane distance of <2 μm at depths of 8 –46 μm from the surface of SC. The field of view spanned 42 –135 μm 

and each plane was imaged at a rate of 7.5 Hz. Because the calcium indicator was localized to synaptic boutons, 

fluorescence was not affected by fibers of passage. 

Ele ctrophysiology 

Recordings were made using Neuropixels electrode arrays (Jun et al., 2017) . Probes were mounted to a custom 

3D -printed holder attached to a steel rod and positioned with a micromanipulator (uMP -4, Sensapex Inc.). For 

subsequent track reconstruction, probes were coated with a dye (DiI: ThermoFisher Vybrant V22888/V22885; 

or DiO: ThermoFisher Vybrant V22886) by immers ing the shank for 5 –10 min in an Eppendorf tube 

containing the dye solution, after which they were removed and air -dried. Probes had a soldered connection 

between external reference and ground; at the headstage, ground was connected to an Ag/AgCl wire plac ed on 

the skull. Craniotomies and the ground wire were kept covered with saline throughout the experiment. Probes 

were advanced through the dura and lowered to the target depth at ~10 μm/s, then allowed to settle for 10 min 

before recording. Signals were a cquired with SpikeGLX ( https://billkarsh.github.io/SpikeGLX ), and were 

separate d into an action -potential (AP) band (hardware high -pass filtered at 300 Hz, sampled at 30 kHz) and 

a local -field -potential (LFP) band (low -pass filtered at 500 Hz, sampled at 2.5 kHz) . Recordings were repeated 

across different penetration sites on multiple subsequent days. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Experimental setup and visual stimuli 

The mouse was head fixed with a headplate holder that did not obstr uct the visual field. For two -photon 

imaging, the mouse was free to run on an air -suspended Styrofoam ball (20 cm in diameter), whose rotation 

was measured by two optical computer mice (Dombeck et al., 2010) . For electrophysiology, the mouse was free 

to run on a plastic wheel ( 8.5 cm wide, 1 9 cm diameter) (Warren et al., 2021) , whose rotation was measured 

by a rotary encoder (1,024 pulses per rotation, Kübler, Germany). The mouse was acclimated to he ad -fixation 

for at least three days before the first recording session, step -wise increasing fixation time from 5 min on the 

first day to 20 min on the last day. 

For two -photon imaging, t he mouse was surrounded by three computer screens ( Iiyama ProLite E1980SD 

placed ~20 cm from the mouse’s eyes; 60 Hz refresh rate) at right angles covering the visual field from −135 

to 135  azimuth and −42  (bottom) to 42  (top) elevation. In some experiments, Fresnel lenses (BHPA220 -2-

6 or BHPA220 -2-5, Wuxi Bohai Opt ics) were mounted in front of the monitors to compensate for reduction in 

luminance and contrast at steeper viewing angles relative to the monitors , and lenses were coated with 

scattering window film (frostbite, The Window Film Company) to prevent specular reflections. The red channel 

of the monitors was switched off to reduce light contamination in the red fluorescence channel. To track the 

eye contralateral to the recording site, we illuminated the eye with an infrared LED (850 nm, Mightex SLS -

0208 -A or M ightex SLS -0208 -B). Videos of the eye were captured at 30 Hz with a camera (DMK 23U618 or 

DMK 21BU04.H, The Imaging Source) equipped with a zoom lens (Thorlabs MVL7000) and a filter (long -pass, 

Thorlabs FEL0750; or band -pass, combining long -pass 092/52x0.7 5, The Imaging Source, and short -pass 

FES0900, Thorlabs). 

For electrophysiological recordings, visual stimuli were presented on one computer screen (Dell P1917S; 37.5 

× 30 cm, 1280 × 1024 pixels, 60 Hz refresh rate), positioned 20 cm from the mouse’s left eye and spanning -95° 

(left) to 0° (right) azimuth and -27° (bottom) to 51° (top) elevation. 

Brightness levels of the monitors were linearized around a mean level of 83 cd/m 2 (two -photon imaging) or 36 

cd/m 2 (electrophysiology) . All visual stimuli were defined in an orthonormal space, where X and Y represent 

azimuth (or longitude ) and elevation (or latitude ), respectively, in degrees of the visual field. To correctly 

display these stimuli , the 2D orthonormal space was mapped on the 2D planes of the monitors using the 

equirectangular or cylindrical mapping , which preserves the meridian lines as vertical lines, but introduces 

distortion around the poles. In the imaging experiments, t he stimuli were created using PsychToolbox 

(Brainard, 1997) and then mapped onto screen using custom -written code . In the electrophysiology 

experiments, stimuli together with the correct mapping were produced using BonVision (Lopes et al., 2021) .

Sinusoidal drifting gratings cover ed the complete screen s pace (full -field) , had a spatial frequency of 0.08 

cycles/deg, a temporal frequency of 2 cycles/s, and were presented at 100% contrast. Gratings drifted in one 

of 12 equidistant directions and were presented for 2 s separated by a gray screen for 3 –6 s (two -photon 

imaging) or 2 –3 s (electrophysiology) .

Static sinusoidal gratings also covered the complete screen space, had a spatial frequency of 0.08 cycles/deg, 

and were presented at 100% contrast. Static gratings varied in orientation (0 °–135°, in steps of 45°) and spatial 

phase (0°, 120°, 240°), comprising all possible combinations. Each static grating was presented for 1 s with an 

inter -stimulus interval of 2 –3 s. 

Moving bars were black on mean -gray background , had a width of 2.5°, a length spanning th e full screen size ,

and moved at a speed of 15°/s. Bars varied in direction of movement (0° –315°, in steps of 45°). Each bar was 

presented in a window of 4 s with an inter -stimulus interval 3 –5.5 s. 

Within blocks of the same stimulus type, e ach stimu lus was repeated 15 or 20 times following a pseudo -random 

presentation order. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

To map RF s and to determine the position of SC along the probe , we presented checkerboard images (visual 

noise) with white, black and mean gray squares with an edge length of 10 °. The stimulus updated at a rate of 6 

Hz and was presented for >9 min. In each noise image, each square was randomly assigned its luminance value 

with a 98% probability of being gray and 1% probabilities of being black and white (for two -photon imaging), 

or 20 out of 288 squares was black or white (for electrophysiology) . Alternatively, RFs were mapped using 

black and white circles with diameters varying between 0.5 ° and 32 °. Circles were presented individually on 

gray background at a rate of 10 Hz, for at least 5 min. 

Data analysis 

Preprocessing of two -photon imaging data 

Preprocessing has been described previously (Schröder et al., 2020) . Shortly, a ll raw two -photon imaging 

movies were analyzed using Suite2p (implemented in Matlab, Mathworks) to align frames and detect regions 

of interest (Pachitariu et al., 2016) . We used the red channel re flecting TdTomato expressed in inhibitory 

neurons to align frames . For imaging data of retinal boutons, we also aligned f rames in depth, i.e. when the 

brain moved perpendicular to the imaging planes, fluorescence data from neighboring imaging planes was 

used to correct this movement. Regions of interest (ROIs) were detected using the aligned frames of the green 

channel, and were then manually curated using the Suite2p GUI. 

Using the aligned movies and detected ROIs resulting from Suite2p analysis, we extracted the fluorescence 

from the green and the red channel within each ROI. To correct the calcium traces for contamination by 

surrounding neuropil, we also extracted the fluorescence of the surrounding neuropil for each ROI using the 

green channel. To correct for contamination, the neuropil trace, N, was subtracted from the calcium trace, F, 

using a correction factor α: F c(t) = F(t) – α∙N(t). The correction factor was determined for each ROI individually 

(Dipoppa et al., 2018) . To correct for potential brain movements, we used the red fluorescence traces of eac h

ROI to regress out changes in fluorescence that were not due to neural activity. 

To a void sampling the same neuron/bouton more than once , we removed duplicate ROIs that were close to 

each other in neighboring imaging planes and that had highly correlate d calcium traces .

Spike sorting 

Preprocessing and spike sorting were performed using the IBL -sorter pipeline (International Brain Laboratory 

et al., 2022) , which includes common -median referencing, channel -noise whitening, detection and removal of 

noisy channels, and an initial estimate of probe drift. Kilosort2.5 was then executed using the detection 

thresholds of 9 for high -threshold detection and 3 for low -threshold detection. Unit quality was assessed with 

Bombcell (Fabre et al., 2023) . Units were included only if they were labelled good by Bombc ell and satisfied 

the following quality criteria: refractory -period violations ≤15%, <35% of spikes falling below the detection 

threshold, presence ratio >25%, and ≥300 spikes. All retained units were subsequently curated manually in 

phy ( https://github.com/cortex -lab/phy ) to identify potential merges or splits. Decisions were based on 

waveform similarity, the bimodality of waveform feature distributions, the spike amplitude distributions and 

drift patterns, and cross -correlogram structure between putative units. 

Tracking of pupil position 

Pupil videos were processed offline using custom MATLAB code as described previously (Schröde r et al., 

2020) . Briefly, frames were mildly spatially filtered, the pupil contour was detected with a level -crossing edge 

detector, and artifacts from infrared reflections or whiskers were removed by excluding concave contour 

segments. Pupil position was then estimated from an ellipse fitted to the remaining contour. Eye blinks were 

detected from frame intensity and correlation to the average frame, visually checked, and excluded from 

further analysis. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Position of SC along recording probe 

To identify the SC surface and the border between stratum griseum superficiale (SGS) and stratum opticum 

(SO) in Neuropixels recordings, we used visually evoked local field potentials (LFPs) following established 

approaches (Ito et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2020; Stitt et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2014) . For each recording, we first 

subtracted the median LFP across time from each channel to remove channel -specific offsets. We then 

processed the two vertical columns of Neuropixels channels separately. Within each column, we smoothed the 

raw LFP in time and depth by convolving with a Ga ussian kernel (5 channels in depth, 21 time bins). At each 

time point, we subtracted the LFP averaged across all channels of a column to emphasize local depth -

dependent structure. We next identified the most effective pixel (for noise stimuli) or circle (f or circle stimuli) 

that resulted in the largest LFP amplitude and aligned the LFP to the pixel’s or circle’s onset times .

The SC surface was defined from the depth profile of the evoked LFP. For each channel depth, we averaged the 

aligned LFP across repeti tions of the effective stimulus and then averaged pairs of channels at the same depth 

from the two columns, yielding one LFP trace per depth. For each depth, we computed the peak amplitude of 

the visually evoked LFP. Moving from the channel with the larges t amplitude to superficial channels, the 

surface was assigned to the first channel whose evoked LFP amplitude fell below 25% of the peak amplitude. 

To locate the SGS -SO border, we computed the current -source density (CSD) as the second spatial derivative 

of the stimulus -aligned LFP traces and averaged th ose across repetitions. At the latency with maximal positive 

CSD amplitude, we identified the first channel below this maximum whose CSD value was negative; this depth 

was taken as the SGS -SO boundary. 

Becau se SO is part of superficial sSC, the SGS -SO border does not mark the boundary between sSC and dSC. 

We therefore used histological brain sections containing the probe tracks to estimate the depth of the sSC -dSC 

border. Probe tracks were registered to the m ouse brain atlas (Franklin and Paxinos, 2007) , and anatomical 

distances were measured along the reconst ructed tracks. Across atlas -registered probe tracks, the full depth of 

sSC was 1.66 times the distance from the SC surface to the SGS -SO border. The total depth of SC was 

approximately 1.24 mm in the atlas. In addition, distances measured along the physica l probes were 0.79 times 

the corresponding distances measured in the atlas. Therefore, for each recording, we defined the SC surface 

and SGS -SO border from the visually evoked LFP and CSD as described above, defined the sSC -dSC border as 

1.66 times the sur face -to -SGS -SO distance, and defined the bottom of SC as 1.24 mm × 0.79 below the SC 

surface. 

Response amplitude s to visual stimuli 

The calculation of response amplitudes in response to drifting gratings has been described previously 

(Schröder et al., 2020) . Here, we used the same strategy for responses to static gratings and moving bars. We

quantified response amplitudes to the stimuli by modelling the calcium trace as the sum of stimulus -evoked 

responses . For each stimulus presentation, the response w as model ed as the product of a scaling factor and a

temporal response kernel that was 10 s long and aligned to stimulus onset . The same temporal kernel was used 

for each trial independent of specific stimulus features such as direction of movement . Compared with simply 

subtracting the mean pre -stimulus activity from the mean activity during stimulus presentation, this approach 

models all stimulus presentations in one continuous trace , allowing residual calcium signals from preceding 

trials to be separated from the response evoked by the current stimulus. 

The model was fitted iteratively . In the first step, we fitted the temporal kernel using a General Linear Model ,

i.e. a linear regres sion model of the form 

𝑦 = 𝑋𝛽 + 𝜖 

where 𝑦 is the fluorescence trace of one ROI, 𝑋 is the design matrix, 𝛽 contains the fitted temporal kernel , and 

𝜖 is the residual error. 𝑋 ha s size 𝑇 × 𝐾 , where 𝑇 is the number of samples in each calcium trace and 𝐾 is the 

number of samples in each kernel. 𝑋 𝑖 ,𝑗 equals the current response amplitude 𝑎 𝑟 (initially set to 1) for trial 𝑟 if 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

trial 𝑟 started 𝑖 − 𝑗 samples before time point 𝑖 , and otherwise 𝑋 𝑖 ,𝑗 = 0. The resulting kernel 𝛽 was normalized 

to have an absolute maximum of 1. 

In the second step, we fitted the response amplitudes in a second General Linear Model 

𝑦 = 𝑈𝛼 + 𝜖 

where 𝑦 is again the fluorescence trace of one ROI, 𝑈 is the design matrix for fitting trial amplitudes, 𝛼 contains 

the fitted t rial amplitudes, and 𝜖 is the residual error. If T is the number of samples in the calcium trace and R 

is the number of grating presentations, then 𝑈 ha s size 𝑇 × 𝑅 , and 𝛼 ha s size 𝑅 × 1 . Each column of 𝑈 

correspond s to one trial. Specifically, if trial 𝑟 started at sample 𝑠 , then 

𝑈 𝑖 ,𝑟 = {𝛽 𝑖 −𝑠 , 0 ≤ 𝑖 − 𝑠 < 𝐾 

0, otherwise 

where 𝛽 is the fitted temporal kernel of length 𝐾 .

Both steps were repeated until the values of the response amplitudes stopped changing acros s iterations. 

To estimate temporal kernels and amplitudes in response to moving bars, we introduced a third step in the 

iterative fitting procedure to determine the delay of the response relative to stimulus onset, which depended 

on motion directions and the location of the RF . The delays were estimated for each motion direction using 

the cross -correlation between the trial -averaged response and the trial -averaged prediction from the current 

response kernel and trial amplitudes. 

To test responsiveness of a unit to a stimulus type , i.e., whether it had a stimulus response that was significantly 

different from baseline, we randomly shifted the response of each unit against the stimulus presentation times. 

A unit was determined to be responsive if the mean squ are d error (MSE) of the fits to the measured responses 

was smaller than the 95% confidence interval of MSEs resulting from fits to the randomly shifted responses. 

To estimate response amplitudes from electrophysiological recordings, we calculated firing ra tes from spikes 

between 0 and 2 s after stimulus onset and , for each trial, subtracted the firing rate between 0 and 0.5 s before 

stimulus onset . The unit was deemed responsive to a stimulus type if the grand mean response was different 

from zero (using a linear model and a t -test on the intercept) or if responses to different stimuli of the same 

type were significantly different from each other (using a linear model and an F -test on the coefficients for all 

stimuli) .

Direction and orientation preferences a nd selectivity index 

The direction and orientation selectivity index of a unit was determined from its mean response amplitudes, 

Rk, to each stimulus (drifting gratings, static gratings, moving bars) . Mean amplitudes of units suppressed by 

gratings (respon ses to most stimuli <0) were inverted; remaining negative amplitudes were set to zero. 

Direction selectivity was assessed by scaling unit vectors pointing into the stimulus direction, αk, by the mean 

amplitudes, then summing these vectors: 𝑅 = ∑ 𝑅 𝑘 ∙𝑒 𝑖 𝛼 𝑘 𝑘  

> ∑𝑅 𝑘 𝑘

. The angle and length of R are preferred direction and 

direction selectivity index (DSI). To determine preferred orientation and orientation selectivity, 𝛼 𝑘 was first 

doubled. Significance of direction and orientation selectivity, respectively, w as determined by a permutation 

test (1,000 permutations of stimulus direction or orientation across trials ). Units were classified as direction -

or orientation -selective only if the corresponding selectivity index was significantly larger than zero and at 

least 0.1. 

Colormaps for the visuali zation of preferred directions and orientations are perceptually uniform (Kovesi, 

2015) .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Mapping of receptive fields 

We presented sparse sequences of white and black squares , or white and black circl es of varying sizes, to 

characterize the receptive fields, using the responses to white squares or circles for the ON subfield and to 

black squares or circles for the OFF subfield. For imaging data, we first cleaned the calcium traces by removing 

any slow decays at the start of experiments (likely introduced due to bleaching) and high -pass filtering the data 

(subtracting smoothed traces treated with a moving median with a window size of 20 s). We used linear 

regression to simultaneously fit two spatio -temporal filters —one for the ON field and one for the OFF field. 

The time dimension of the filters spanned 0.2 –0.5 s after each stimulus frame for two -photon data, and 0 –

0.2 s for electrophysiology data. For the ON field, only the appearance of white squa res /circles was considered, 

for the OFF field only black squares /circles . The fits were regularized by imposing spatial smoothness on the 

two receptive fields (Smyth et al., 2003) . We then fitted 2D Gaussians to the ON -, the OFF - and the mean 

between the ON - and OFF -subfield. The final spatial RF was the Gaussian that minimized the mean squared 

error with the mapp ed RF (if only one subfield was fitted by the Gaussian, the fit for the other subfield was set 

to zero for each pixel). The final temporal filter of the RF was determined by the least -squares scalar weights 

of the fitted 2D Gaussian for each time point. 

A unit was considered to have a genuine receptive field if (1) the explained variance for the response to the 

visual noise predicted by the final spatio -temporal RF (Gaussian weighted in time) was 0.01, and (2) the peak 

of the fitted Gaussian was at least 5 times the SD of the residuals between mapped RF and fitted Gaussian. 

Correction for eye movements during receptive field mapping 

To assess whether small eye movements during head -fixed two -photon imaging affected the estimated RF 

positions, we re -fitted RFs while accounting for concurrent gaze position on each stimulus frame. We modelled 

the mapping from pupil displacement (in pixel s, relative to the median pupil position) to gaze shift in visual 

degrees as a linear transform, [𝛥𝑎𝑧 ; 𝛥𝑒𝑙 ] = 𝐴 · [𝛥𝑥 ; 𝛥𝑦 ], where 𝐴 is a 2 × 2 matrix estimated from the data. The 

elements of 𝐴 were constrained to reflect the expected geometry of mo use eye movements: horizontal pupil 

displacements were required to produce larger shifts in azimuth than in elevation, vertical displacements to 

produce larger shifts in elevation than in azimuth, and small rotations between the camera and visual 

coordinat e systems were permitted. 

We estimated 𝐴 and the gaze -corrected RF centers jointly using an iterative alternating procedure. In step 1, 

we shifted each frame of the sparse noise stimulus by the gaze displacement predicted under the current 𝐴 ,

using bilin ear interpolation of the stimulus grid, and re -fitted the spatio -temporal RF maps using the same 

regularized ridge regression followed by 2D Gaussian fitting , as described in  Mapping of receptive fields . In 

step 2, holding the Gaussian RF shapes fixed, we re -optimized 𝐴 by minimizing the sum of squared errors 

between the observed neural responses and those predicted by convolving each Gaussian RF with the original 

sti mulus displaced by 𝐴 · [𝛥𝑥 ; 𝛥𝑦 ] on each frame, using constrained nonlinear optimization (MATLAB 

fmincon). The two steps were repeated with the updated 𝐴 if doing so reduced prediction error; otherwise the 

algorithm was terminated. Iterations continued u ntil the mean squared change in the elements of 𝐴 fell below 

10 ⁻⁵, or after a maximum of 10 iterations. 

Relating RF locations to retinotopy 

To relate the positions of imaged units within the FOV to their RF locations in visual space, we estimated a 

retinotopic transform for each recording. We modeled azimuth and elevation of the RF center as linear 

functions of the unit’s position in the imaging plane and fitted this model under the constraint that azimuth 

and elevation axes in brain space were ortho gonal. 

We only considered units with a genuine RF (see RF mapping) and a recording had to have at least 10 such 

units. Units with outlier RF locations (elevation or azimuth was >5 median absolute deviations away from the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

median across the population) were excluded. We then fitted a linear mapping from brain coordinates (𝑥 , 𝑦 )

to RF azimuth 𝑎𝑧 and elevation 𝑒𝑙 :

𝑎𝑧 = 𝑎 1 + 𝑏 1𝑥 + 𝑐 1𝑦 

𝑒𝑙 = 𝑎 2 + 𝑏 2𝑥 + 𝑐 2𝑦 

To enforce orthogonality between the azimuth and elevation axes in brain space, we constrained the ele vation 

coefficients (𝑏 2, 𝑐 2) to be orthogonal to the azimuth coefficients (𝑏 1, 𝑐 1):

𝑏 2 = 1 √1 + (𝑏 1 𝑐 1⁄ )2⁄

𝑐 2 = (−𝑏 1/𝑐 1) √1 + (𝑏 1 𝑐 1⁄ )2⁄

Model parameters were obtained by weighted least squares, weighting each unit by the variance explained by 

its final spatio -tempora l RF model, so that units with more reliable RF estimates contributed more strongly to 

the fit. The resulting transform defined the optimal scaling, translation, and rotation that minimized the 

distance between mapped RF locations and the fitted retinotopi c coordinates for each recording. 

Geometric model of direction and orientation preferences 

To relate measured preferences to the retinal topographic organization of directions and orientations, we used 

geometric models derived from retinal recordings (Laniado et al., 2025; Sabbah et al., 2017) . For each unit, we 

computed four predicted directions and four predicted orientations at its RF location, corresponding to the 

four motion classes and four orientation classes defined in these studies. 

Both retinal studies expressed optimal axes in retinal coordinates and then transformed them into body 

coordinates based on measurements of eye and head position. Axes for the left eye were provided (personal 

communication from Shai Sabbah) as points on the unit sphere in azimuth -elevation coordinates, where 

elevation is 0° at the horizon and increases towards the top of the visual field, and azimuth is 0° at the vertical 

meridian (n ose) and increases clockwise. For motion directions, the four axes pointed to the convergence 

points of directional vectors on the sphere (advance, retreat, rise, fall): advance = (180°, −15°), retreat = (0°, 

11°), rise = (−67°, −83°), fall = (106°, 88°). For orientations, we used four axes defining two longitudinal 

(“long”) and two latitudinal (“lat”) fields. Longitudinal orientations: horizontal = (187°, 90°), vertical = (98°, 

26°); latitudinal orientations: horizontal = (74°, 22°), vertical = (232°, 85°) .

These axes were defined under the assumption that the mouse head is pitched downward by 29° in the 

ambulatory posture (Oommen and Stahl, 2008) , with 0° defined as breg ma and lambda at the same height. In 

our experiments, mice were head -fixed and generally positioned with bregma lower than lambda to improve 

access to the SC, but the exact head pitch was not recorded for each mouse when the headplate was fixed during 

surg ery. We therefore rotated all axes about the interaural (y) axis by an angle 𝛼 , constrained to the range 0 –

29°, to account for uncertainty in head pitch. For each mouse, 𝛼 was optimized by minimizing the discrepancy 

between predicted and measured directi on and orientation preferences. The fitted 𝛼 values for each mouse and 

recording modality are shown in Figure S 3I. Rotation on the sphere proceeded as follows :

1. Each axis with azimuth 𝑇 𝑎𝑧 and elevation 𝑇 𝑒𝑙 was converted to Cartesian coordinates :

𝑇 = (cos (𝑇 𝑒𝑙 ) cos (𝑇 𝑎𝑧 ) , cos (𝑇 𝑒𝑙 ) sin (𝑇 𝑎𝑧 ) , sin (𝑇 𝑒𝑙 ))

2. A rotat ion by angle 𝛼 around the +y axis (right -hand rule) yielded :

𝑈 = (Tx cos (𝛼 ) + Tz sin (𝛼 ) , 𝑇 𝑦 , −Tx sin (𝛼 ) + Tz cos (𝛼 ))

3. The result was then transformed back to azimuth -elevation coordinates :

𝑇 𝑎𝑧 = tan −1(𝑈 𝑦 , 𝑈 𝑥 ) , 𝑇 𝑒𝑙 = sin −1(𝑈 𝑧 )

We obtain ed the predicted local direction or orientation at a given RF location as follows: 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

1. We converted the rotated axis (𝑇 𝑎𝑧 , 𝑇 𝑒𝑙 ) and the RF position (𝑟 𝑎𝑧 , 𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ) to Cartesian vectors :

𝑇 = (cos (𝑇 𝑒𝑙 ) cos (𝑇 𝑎𝑧 ) , cos (𝑇 𝑒𝑙 ) sin (𝑇 𝑎𝑧 ) , sin (𝑇 𝑒𝑙 ))

and 

𝑟 = (cos (𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ) cos (𝑟 𝑎𝑧 ) , cos (𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ) sin (𝑟 𝑎𝑧 ) , sin (𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ))

2. For a longitudinal field, the local direction vector 𝑣 at 𝑟 was the component of 𝑇 tangential to the 

sphere :

𝑣 = 𝑇 − (𝑇 ⊤𝑟 ) 𝑟 

For a latitudinal field, 𝑣 was given by the cross -product :

𝑣 = 𝑟 × 𝑇 

3. We then projected 𝑣 onto the tangent plane at 𝑟 using basis vectors aligned with increasing azimuth 

and elevation :

𝑒 𝜙 = (− sin (𝑟 𝑎𝑧 ), cos (𝑟 𝑎𝑧 ) , 0 )

𝑒 𝜃 = (− sin (𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ) cos (𝑟 𝑎𝑧 ) , − sin (𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ) sin (𝑟 𝑎𝑧 ) , cos (𝑟 𝑒𝑙 ))

𝑤 = (𝑣 ⊤𝑒 𝜙 , 𝑣 ⊤𝑒 𝜃 )

4. We computed the local direction angle 𝑥 on the sphere: 

𝑥 = tan −1(𝑤 2/𝑤 1)

5. Finally, we converted 𝑥 to our convention (0° = rightward, 90° = downward) as: 

𝑧 = 2𝜋 − 𝑥 

Using these constructions, we obtained, for each unit and each model (direction and orientation), the predicted 

vectors corresponding to the four direction classes and four orientation classes at the unit’s RF. For each unit, 

we then assigned the predicted direction and orientation whose vector was closest (smallest angular difference) 

to the measured preferred direction an d orientation. This angular difference defined the prediction error 

between the unit’s preference and the geometric model. To test whether the retinal geometric model explained 

the data better than expected by chance, we compared the median angular differe nce across units to a null 

distribution obtained by permuting RF locations 1,000 times and report the median together with the 2.5th –

97.5th percentile interval of this permutation distribution. 

Quantification and Statistical Analysis 

All tests were two -sid ed, unless otherwise stated. 

Permutation tests were performed by generating surrogate datasets from the measured data, computing the 

test statistic for each surrogate dataset, and comparing the resulting null distribution to the test statistic of the 

measu red data, i.e. whether or not the measured test statistic falls inside the 2.5 –97.5 percentiles of the null 

distribution. The surrogate datasets were generated by randomly permuting the relevant feature/label across 

sample points. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

## References 

Ahmadlou M, Heimel JA. 2015. Preference for concentric orientations in the mouse superior colliculus. 

Nature communications 6:6773. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7773, PMID: 25832803 

Baden T, Berens P, Franke K, Román Rosón, M, Bethge M, Euler T. 2016. The functional diversity of retinal 

ganglion cells in the mouse. Nature 529 :345 –350. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16468 

Basole A, White LE, Fitzpatrick D. 2003. Mapping multiple fe atures in the population response of visual 

cortex. Nature 423 :986 –90. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01721, PMID: 12827202 

Bonin V, Histed MH, Yurgenson S, Reid RC. 2011. Local diversity and fine -scale organization of receptive 

fields in mouse visual cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience 31 :18506 –21. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2974 -11.2011, PMID: 22171051 

Borges K, Xian Q, Lu R, Liang Y, Haley S, Nigam S, Ji N. 2025. Retinal ganglion cell input to superior 

colliculus encodes salient informati on. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.06.687035 

Brainard DH. 1997. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial Vision 10 :433 –436. PMID: 9176952 

Cang J, Chen C, Li C, Liu Y. 2024. Genetically defined neuron types underlying visuomotor transformation in 

the superi or colliculus. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 25 :726 –739. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583 -

024 -00856 -4

Chen H, Savier EL, DePiero VJ, Cang J. 2021. Lack of Evidence for Stereotypical Direction Columns in the 

Mouse Superior Colliculus. The Journal of Neuros cience 41 :461 –473. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1155 -20.2020 

Chen T -W, Wardill TJ, Sun Y, Pulver SR, Renninger SL, Baohan A, Schreiter ER, Kerr RA, Orger MB, 

Jayaraman V, Looger LL, Svoboda K, Kim DS. 2013. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging 

neuronal activity. Nature 499 :295 –300. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12354, PMID: 23868258 

De Franceschi G, Solomon SG. 2018. Visual response properties of neurons in the superficial layers of 

superior colliculus of awake mouse. The Journal o f Physiology. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1113/JP276964 

De Malmazet D, Kühn NK, Farrow K. 2018. Retinotopic Separation of Nasal and Temporal Motion Selectivity 

in the Mouse Superior Colliculus. Current Biology 28 :2961 -2969.e4. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cu b.2018.07.001, PMID: 30174186 

De Malmazet D, Kühn NK, Li C, Farrow K. 2024. Retinal origin of orientation but not direction selective 

maps in the superior colliculus. Current Biology 34 :1222 -1233.e7. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2024.02.001, PMID: 38 417446 

DePiero VJ, Deng Z, Chen C, Savier EL, Chen H, Wei W, Cang J. 2024. Transformation of motion pattern 

selectivity from retina to superior colliculus. Journal of Neuroscience. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1704 -23.2024, PMID: 38569924 

Dhande OS, Huberman AD. 2014. Retinal ganglion cell maps in the brain: implications for visual processing. 

Current opinion in neurobiology 24 :133 –42. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2013.08.006, PMID: 

24492089 

Dipoppa M, Ranson A, Krumin M, Pachitariu M, Cara ndini M, Harris KD. 2018. Vision and Locomotion 

Shape the Interactions between Neuron Types in Mouse Visual Cortex. Neuron 98 :602 -615.e8. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.03.037 

Dräger UC, Hubel DH. 1975. Responses to visual stimulation and relat ionship between visual, auditory, and 

somatosensory inputs in mouse superior colliculus. Journal of neurophysiology 38 :690 –713. PMID: 

1127462 

Dreosti E, Odermatt B, Dorostkar MM, Lagnado L. 2009. A genetically encoded reporter of synaptic activity 

in vivo. Nature Methods 6:883 –889. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1399 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Edwards MA, Caviness Jr. VS, Schneider GE. 1986. Development of cell and fiber lamination in the mouse 

superior colliculus. Journal of Comparative Neurology 248 :395 –409. DOI: 

https://doi.or g/10.1002/cne.902480308 

Ellis EM, Gauvain G, Sivyer B, Murphy GJ. 2016. Shared and distinct retinal input to the mouse superior 

colliculus and dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Neurophysiology 116 :602 –610. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00227. 2016, PMID: 27169509 

Fabre JMJ, Van Beest EH, Peters AJ, Carandini M, Harris KD. 2023. Bombcell: automated curation and cell 

classification of spike -sorted electrophysiology data. 

Feinberg EH, Meister M. 2014. Orientation columns in the mouse superior coll iculus. Nature 519 :229 –232. 

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14103 

Franklin KBJ, Paxinos G. 2007. The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates, Third edition. Academic Press. 

Hong YK, Kim I -J, Sanes JR. 2011. Stereotyped axonal arbors of retinal ganglion cell subsets in the mouse 

superior colliculus. The Journal of comparative neurology 519 :1691 –711. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.22595, PMID: 21452242 

Hoy JL, Farrow K. 2025. The superior colliculus. Current Biology 35 :R164 –R168. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2025.01.022, PMID: 40068606 

Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1968. Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey striate cortex. The 

Journal of physiology 195 :215 –43. P MID: 4966457 

Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1962. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s 

visual cortex. The Journal of physiology 160 :106 –54. PMID: 14449617 

Huberman AD, Wei W, Elstrott J, Stafford BK, Feller MB, Barres BA. 2009. Genetic identification of an On -

Off direction -selective retinal ganglion cell subtype reveals a layer -specific subcortical map of posterior 

motion. Neuron 62 :327 –34. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1016/j.neuron.2009.04.014, PMID: 19447089 

Ibbotson M, Jung YJ. 2020. Origins of Functional Organization in the Visual Cortex. Frontiers in Systems 

Neuroscience 14 . DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2020.00010 

Inayat S, Barchini J, Chen H, Feng L, L iu X, Cang J. 2015. Neurons in the Most Superficial Lamina of the 

Mouse Superior Colliculus Are Highly Selective for Stimulus Direction. Journal of Neuroscience 

35 :7992 –8003. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0173 -15.2015 

International Brain Laborator y, Banga K, Boussard J, Chapuis GA, Faulkner M, Harris KD, Huntenburg JM, 

Hurwitz C, Lee HD, Paninski L, Rossant C, Roth N, Steinmetz NA, Windolf C, Winter O. 2022. Spike 

sorting pipeline for the International Brain Laboratory. 

Ito S, Feldheim DA, Litke AM . 2017. Segregation of visual response properties in the mouse superior 

colliculus and their modulation during locomotion. The Journal of Neuroscience 37 :3689 –16. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3689 -16.2017 

Jang J, Song M, Paik SB. 2020. Retino -Cor tical Mapping Ratio Predicts Columnar and Salt -and -Pepper 

Organization in Mammalian Visual Cortex. Cell Reports 30 :3270 -3279.e3. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.038, PMID: 32160536 

Jimenez LO, Tring E, Trachtenberg JT, Ringach DL. 2018. Local tuning biases in mouse primary visual 

cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology 120 :274 –280. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1152/JN.00150.2018/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/Z9K0061846420003.JPEG, PMID: 

29668380 

Jun JJ, Steinmetz NA, Siegle JH, Denman DJ, Bauza M, Barbarits B, Lee AK, Anastassiou CA, Andrei A, 

Aydın Ç, Barbic M, Blanche TJ, Bonin V, Couto J, Dutta B, Gratiy SL, Gutnisky DA, Häusser M, Karsh B, 

Ledochowitsch P, Lopez CM, Mitelut C, Musa S, Okun M, Pachitariu M, Putzeys J, Rich PD, Rossant C, 

Sun W, Svoboda K, Carand ini M, Harris KD, Koch C, O’Keefe J, Harris TD. 2017. Fully integrated silicon 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

probes for high -density recording of neural activity. Nature 551 :232 –236. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24636 

Kasai M, Isa T. 2021. Effects of light isoflurane anesthesia o n organization of direction and orientation 

selectivity in the superficial layer of the mouse superior colliculus. Journal of Neuroscience JN -RM -1196 -

21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1196 -21.2021, PMID: 34872926 

Kaschube M. 2014. Neural maps vers us salt -and -pepper organization in visual cortex. Current Opinion in 

Neurobiology 24 :95 –102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2013.08.017 

Kay JN, Huerta ID la, Kim I -J, Zhang Y, Yamagata M, Chu MW, Meister M, Sanes JR. 2011. Retinal Ganglion 

Cells with Distinct Directional Preferences Differ in Molecular Identity, Structure, and Central 

Projections. Journal of Neuroscience 31 :7753 –7762. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0907 -

11.2011, PMID: 21613488 

Kay RB, Triplett JW. 2017. Visual Neurons in the Su perior Colliculus Innervated by Islet2+ or Islet2− Retinal 

Ganglion Cells Display Distinct Tuning Properties. Frontiers in Neural Circuits 11 . DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2017.00073 

Kerschensteiner D, Hardesty JF. 2022. Feature Detection by Retinal Ganglion Cells. Annual Review of Vision 

Science 8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/ANNUREV -VISION -100419 -112009 

Kondo S, Yoshida T, Ohki K. 2016. Mixed functional microarchitectures for orientation selectivity in the 

mouse primary visual cortex. Nature Commun ications 7:13210. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13210 

Kovesi P. 2015. Good Colour Maps: How to Design Them. DOI: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1509.03700 

Laniado DD, Maron Y, Gemmer JA, Sabbah S. 2025. A spherical code of retinal orientation selectiv ity 

enables decoding in ensembled and retinotopic operation. Cell Reports 44 . DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115373, PMID: 40023844 

Lee KH, Tran A, Turan Z, Meister M. 2020. The sifting of visual information in the superior colliculus. eLife 

9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50678 

Li Y, Meister M. 2023. Functional cell types in the mouse superior colliculus. eLife 12 :e82367. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.82367 

Li Y, Turan Z, Meister M. 2020. Functional Architecture of Motion Direction i n the Mouse Superior 

Colliculus. Current Biology 30 :3304 -3315.e4. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2020.06.023 

Liang Y, Lu R, Borges K, Ji N. 2023. Stimulus edges induce orientation tuning in superior colliculus. Nature 

Communications 14 :4756. DOI: https ://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -023 -40444 -1

Liu X, Huang H, Snutch TP, Cao P, Wang L, Wang F. 2022. The Superior Colliculus: Cell Types, Connectivity, 

and Behavior. Neuroscience Bulletin 38 :1519 –1540. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12264 -022 -00858 -1

Lopes G, Farr ell K, Horrocks EA, Lee C -Y, Morimoto MM, Muzzu T, Papanikolaou A, Rodrigues FR, 

Wheatcroft T, Zucca S, Solomon SG, Saleem AB. 2021. Creating and controlling visual environments 

using BonVision. eLife 10 :e65541. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.65541 

Mar tin KAC, Schröder S. 2013. Functional heterogeneity in neighboring neurons of cat primary visual cortex 

in response to both artificial and natural stimuli. The Journal of Neuroscience 33 :7325 –44. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4071 -12.2013, PMID: 23616540 

Martin PR. 1986. The projection of different retinal ganglion cell classes to the dorsal lateral geniculate 

nucleus in the hooded rat. Experimental Brain Research 62 :77 –88. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00237404 

Mazade R, Alonso JM. 2017. Thalamocortical processing in vision. Visual Neuroscience 34 :E007. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952523817000049 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Molotkov D, Ferrarese L, Boissonnet T, Asari H. 2023. Topographic axonal projection at single -cell precision 

suppor ts local retinotopy in the mouse superior colliculus. Nature Communications 14 :7418. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -023 -43218 -x

Najafian S, Koch E, Teh KL, Jin J, Rahimi -Nasrabadi H, Zaidi Q, Kremkow J, Alonso J -M. 2022. A theory of 

cortical map forma tion in the visual brain. Nature Communications 2022 13:1 13 :1 –20. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -022 -29433 -y

Nath A, Schwartz GW. 2016. Cardinal Orientation Selectivity Is Represented by Two Distinct Ganglion Cell 

Types in Mouse Retina. The Journal o f Neuroscience 36 :3208 –21. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4554 -15.2016, PMID: 26985031 

Niell CM, Stryker MP. 2008. Highly selective receptive fields in mouse visual cortex. The Journal of 

Neuroscience 28 :7520 –36. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEURO SCI.0623 -08.2008, PMID: 18650330 

Ohki K, Chung S, Ch’ng YH, Kara P, Reid RC. 2005. Functional imaging with cellular resolution reveals 

precise micro -architecture in visual cortex. Nature 433 :597 –603. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03274, PMID: 15660108 

Oommen BS, Stahl JS. 2008. Eye orientation during static tilts and its relationship to spontaneous head 

pitch in the laboratory mouse. Brain Research 1193 :57 –66. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2007.11.053 

Pachitariu M, Sridhar S, Pennington J, St ringer C. 2024. Spike sorting with Kilosort4. Nature Methods 

21 :914 –921. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592 -024 -02232 -7

Pachitariu M, Stringer C, Schröder S, Dipoppa M, Rossi LF, Carandini M, Harris KD. 2016. Suite2p: beyond 

10,000 neurons with standard t wo -photon microscopy. bioRxiv 061507. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1101/061507 

Pologruto TA, Sabatini BL, Svoboda K. 2003. ScanImage: flexible software for operating laser scanning 

microscopes. Biomedical Engineering Online 2:13. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/14 75 -925X -2-13, PMID: 

12801419 

Ringach DL, Mineault PJ, Tring E, Olivas ND, Garcia -Junco -Clemente P, Trachtenberg JT. 2016. Spatial 

clustering of tuning in mouse primary visual cortex. Nature Communications 7:12270. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12270 

Roth ZN, Heeger DJ, Merriam EP. 2018. Stimulus vignetting and orientation selectivity in human visual 

cortex. eLife 7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37241 

Sabbah S, Gemmer JA, Bhatia -Lin A, Manoff G, Castro G, Siegel JK, Jeffery N, Berson DM. 2017. A r etinal 

code for motion along the gravitational and body axes. Nature 546 :492 –497. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22818 

Savier EL, Chen H, Cang J. 2019. Effects of Locomotion on Visual Responses in the Mouse Superior 

Colliculus. The Journal of Neuroscie nce 1854 –19. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1854 -

19.2019, PMID: 31570535 

Schmidt KE, Wolf F. 2021. Punctuated evolution of visual cortical circuits? Evidence from the large rodent 

Dasyprocta leporina, and the tiny primate Microcebus murinus. Curren t Opinion in Neurobiology 71 :110 –

118. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CONB.2021.10.007, PMID: 34823047 

Schröder S, Steinmetz NA, Krumin M, Pachitariu M, Rizzi M, Lagnado L, Harris KD, Carandini M. 2020. 

Arousal Modulates Retinal Output. Neuron 107 :487 -495.e 9. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.04.026 

Shi X, Barchini J, Ledesma HA, Koren D, Jin Y, Liu X, Wei W, Cang J. 2017. Retinal origin of direction 

selectivity in the superior colliculus. Nature Neuroscience 20 :550 –558. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1038 /nn.4498 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Sibille J, Gehr C, Benichov JI, Balasubramanian H, Teh KL, Lupashina T, Vallentin D, Kremkow J. 2022. 

High -density electrode recordings reveal strong and specific connections between retinal ganglion cells 

and midbrain neurons. Nature Communicatio ns 13 :5218. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -022 -

32775 -2

Stitt I, Galindo -Leon E, Pieper F, Engler G, Engel AK. 2013. Laminar profile of visual response properties in 

ferret superior colliculus. Journal of neurophysiology 110 :1333 –45. DOI: 

https://doi.o rg/10.1152/jn.00957.2012, PMID: 23803328 

Tiriac A, Bistrong K, Pitcher MN, Tworig JM, Feller MB. 2022. The influence of spontaneous and visual 

activity on the development of direction selectivity maps in mouse retina. Cell Reports 38 . DOI: 

https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110225, PMID: 35021080 

Vita DJ, Orsi FS, Stanko NG, Clark NA, Tiriac A. 2024. Development and organization of the retinal 

orientation selectivity map. Nature Communications 15 :4829. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -024 -

49206 -z

Wang L, Sarnaik R, Rangarajan K, Liu X, Cang J. 2010. Visual receptive field properties of neurons in the 

superficial superior colliculus of the mouse. The Journal of Neuroscience 30 :16573 –84. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3305 -10.2010, PMID: 21147997 

Warren RA, Zhang Q, Hoffman JR, Li EY, Hong YK, Bruno RM, Sawtell NB. 2021. A rapid whisker -based 

decision underlying skilled locomotion in mice. eLife 10 :e63596. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63596 

Wheatcroft T, Saleem AB, Solomon SG. 2022. Function al Organisation of the Mouse Superior Colliculus. 

Frontiers in Neural Circuits 16 :792959. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2022.792959, PMID: 

35601532 

Yaakov H, Heukamp AS, Riccitelli S, Rivlin -Etzion M. 2025. Differential topographic organization and 

re tinal inheritance of direction and orientation selectivity in the visual thalamus. Nature Communications 

16 :9303. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -025 -64321 -1

Yen S -C, Baker J, Gray CM. 2007. Heterogeneity in the responses of adjacent neurons to natural stimuli in 

cat striate cortex. Journal of neurophysiology 97 :1326 –41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00747.2006, 

PMID: 17079343 

Yu P, Yang Y, Gozel O, Oldenburg I, Dipoppa M, Rossi LF, Miller K, Adesnik H, Ji N, Doiron B. 2025. Circuit -

Based Understandin g of Fine Spatial Scale Clustering of Orientation Tuning in Mouse Visual Cortex. 

bioRxiv 2025.02.11.637768. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.11.637768, PMID: 39990306 

Zhao X, Liu M, Cang J. 2014. Visual Cortex Modulates the Magnitude but Not the Select ivity of Looming -

Evoked Responses in the Superior Colliculus of Awake Mice. Neuron 84 :202 –213. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.037 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

## Supplementary Figures 

Figure S 1. Direction and orientation tuning of SC neurons we re consistent across stimulus types. 

A–C. Single -trial (gray) and mean fitted (black) calcium traces of four example neurons in response to drifting gratings (A; 12 direction s, 

2 s each), moving bars (B; 8 directions, 4 s each), and static gratings (C; 4 orientations × 3 spatial phases, 1 s each). Stimulus epochs are 

indicated by gray shading. We recorded 2,283 SC neurons in response to moving bars and 2,314 neurons in response to static gr atings, 

both within 6 sessions across 5 mice. As for drifting grati ngs, the kernel fits matched the data very well (mean ± SD explained variance: 

0.33 ± 0.21 for bars, 0.30 ± 0.20 for static gratings). Across SC neurons, responsiveness dropped from 50% for drifting grati ngs to 31% 

(697/2,283) for moving bars and 41% (945/ 2,314) for static gratings. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 32 

D–H. Direction (D, E) and orientation (F –H) tuning curves for the example neurons in A –C, showing single -trial response amplitudes 

(gray dots), mean amplitudes (black dots), and preferred direction or orientation (red triangles) when tuning was significant. Tuning is 

shown for drifting gratings (D, F), moving bars (E, G), and static gratings (H). 62 % (4 34 /697) of neurons responsive to moving bars 

were selective for direction (compared to 56% for drifting gratings), while 54 % (37 3/697) were selective for orientation (compared to 

50 % for drifting gratings). In contrast, only 24 % ( 224 /945) of neurons responding to static gratings were selective for orientation. 

I–L. Direct comparisons of preferred directions (I) and preferred orienta tions (J –L) obtained from different stimulus classes. Colored 

dots highlight the example neurons from A –C. SC neurons that were significantly tuned in response to several visual stimuli exhibited 

highly coherent preferences for direction and orientation wi th an average difference of 3.0  in preferred direction for drifting gratings 

and moving bars, and average differences of up to 10 .0  in preferred orientation (drifting gratings vs bars: 3.8 ; drifting vs static 

gratings: 10 .0 ; bars vs static gratings: 1. 8). 

M, N. Mean distribution (± SEM) of direction (M) and orientation (N) selectivity measured with drifting gratin gs, across all sessions 

with at least 20 selective units. Triangles mark the median (across sessions) of the median selectivity index. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 33 

Figure S2 .1 . Eye movements did not substantially affect receptive field position estimates. 

A, C. Example distributions of pupil position during sparse noise stimulation, for a retinal bouton session (A) and an SC neu ron session 

(C). Top: pupil displacemen t in camera pixels (ΔX, ΔY). Bottom: gaze displacement in visual degrees (ΔAzimuth, ΔElevation), obtained 

by applying the fitted linear transform A (see Methods). 

B, D. Example ON and OFF receptive fields fitted without (top) and with (bottom) eye -position correction, for the sessions shown in A 

and C. Ellipses indicate the fitted 2D Gaussian. Color scales are matched between corrected and uncorrected maps. 

E, G. Change in RF center position after eye -position correction (corrected minus uncorrected) for al l well -fitted retinal boutons (E) and 

SC neurons (G). Point color indicates local density. 

F, H. Distribution of Euclidean distances between corrected and uncorrected RF centers for retinal boutons (F) and SC neurons (H). 

I. Gaze position distributions dur ing drifting grating stimulation, shown separately for each of the 12 grating directions (arrows). Each 

panel shows a kernel density estimate pooled across all sessions for which pupil data were available (n = 21 sessions). 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 34 

Figure S 2.2 . Proximity to monitor edges did not systematically affect measured tuning preferences. 

A–D. Direction (A) and orientation (B) preferences versus distance from the RF center to the nearest vertical (left/peripheral) monitor 

edge, for all selectively tuned re tinal boutons with mapped RFs. Corresponding data for SC neurons in C and D. 

E–H. Circular SD (red) of preferred directions (E) and orientations (F) for retinal boutons as a function of RF distance to nea rest vertical 

monitor edge, compared to a null distr ibution obtained by permuting edge distances (black line: median; gray band: 2.5th –97.5th 

percentile interval). Corresponding data for SC neurons in G and H. If the monitor edge had biased tuning preferences towards a specific 

direction or orientation, we would expect that preferences of units closer to the monitor edge are more similar to each other than of 

units farther away from the edge, which was not the case in our data. 

I–P. As in A –H, but using distance from the RF to the nearest horizontal (top) mo nitor edge. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 35 

Figure S 3. Topography for DS -only and OS -only units is similar to overall population. 

A–D. Direction (A) and orientation (B) preferences of DS -only and OS -only retinal boutons across visual space (RFs mapped, not 

retinotopic). Arrows in A indicate the predicted DSGC longitude directions; colored lines in B indicate predicted OSGC longit udes a nd 

latitudes (see  Figure 3A–C). Numbers indicate population size in each polar histogram. Corresponding data for SC neurons in C and D. 

E–H. Angular differences between measured preferences and the closest predicted directions ( E) or orientations ( F) for DS -only and 

OS -only retinal boutons. Median differences (triangles) are compared to null distributions obtained by permuting RF locations (d ark 

gray; median and 2 .5 –97.5 percentile intervals) or by drawing preferences from a uniform distribution (light gray; median and 2.5 –97.5 

percentile intervals). Direction: 11.7  original, 13.2 –16.0  permuted, 19.7 –25.2  uniform; orientation: 7. 6 original, 7. 2–10. 0

permute d, 11.6 –17. 3 uniform. Corresponding data for SC neurons in K and L. Direction: 17.0  original, 17.4 –20.9  permuted, 19. 2–

25. 6 uniform; orientation: 8.1  original, 5.9 –9.6  permuted, 9.9 –18.9  uniform. Direction preferences of retinal boutons matched 

model predictions significantly better than those of SC neurons (p = 0.0 016 , Wilcoxon rank sum test). Orientation preferences matched 

model predictions to equal degrees in retinal boutons and SC ne urons (p = 0.49, Wilcoxon rank sum test). 

I. Optimal head pitch angles estimated for each animal and recording modality. For each mouse, head pitch was chosen as the v alue that 

minimized the difference between measured direction/orientation preferences and the corresponding retinal topographic model 

predictions. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 36 

Figure S 4. Local consistency is not trivially explained by the number of sampled units. 

A–D. Mean consistency of direction (A) and orientation (B) preferences within each 10° patch, plotted versus the number of retinal 

boutons in that patch (red dots). The background grayscale indicates the density of units from a null distribution obtained b y permuting 

RF locations across boutons. Corresponding data for SC neurons in C and D. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 37 

Figure S 5. Weak clustering persisted with RF -based distances and under different stimulus conditions. 

A–D. Pairwise difference in direction ( A) and orientation ( B) preferences versus distance between mapped RFs for all pairs of 

simultaneously recorded retinal boutons. For comparison, mean pairwise differences for SC neurons (teal) are overlaid (same data as in 

C, D ). Corresponding data for SC neurons in C and D. Only retinal boutons with RFs closer than 2.2 visual degrees had direction and 

orie ntation preferences that were more similar than expected from the null distribution. Tuning differences for SC neurons were m uch 

closer to the null distribution . Only orientation preferences were significantly smaller for neurons with RF distances of up to 10 visual 

degrees. 

E. Pairwise difference in direction preferences versus lateral distance in SC (depth ignored) for all pairs of simultaneously recorded SC 

neurons, with preferences measured from responses to moving bars. Mean pairwise tuning differences (86 ) were close to those 

expected from uniform distributions. 

F, G . Same as in E, for orientation preferences measured from moving bars ( F) and static gratings ( G). Mean pairwise tuning differences 

were close to those expected from uniform distributions (40  for moving bars, 4 3 for static gratings). 

In all panels, dots are colored by density, and mean difference as a function of distance is compared to null distribution ob tained by 

permuting neural or RF locations (black line: median; gray band: 2.5th –97 .5th percentile interval). 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint 38 

Figure S 6. Determining position of SC along Neuropixels probe and tuning properties in 

electrophysiology data. 

A, B. Evoked local field potential (LFP, A) and current -source -density (CSD, B) profiles from an exam ple recording in response to the 

most effective square of the visual noise stimulus. The surface of SC is defined at 25% of the peak amplitude in the evoked L FP. The 

border between SGS and SO is defined as the zero -crossing below the largest positive CSD p eak. 

C. Spike amplitudes at spike times of all single units in the same recording as in A and B, plotted against their depths. 

D. Preferred direction versus orientation for SC units selective for both features. 

E. Direction versus orientation selectivity for all tuned SC units. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.21.695778 doi: bioRxiv preprint