Title: Antenna System for Simultaneous Wireless Power and Information Transfer to Brain Implants

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.02036v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 00:54:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
Antenna System for Simultaneous Wireless Power 

# and Information Transfer to Brain Implants 

Ali Khaleghi , Aminolah Hassanvand , Il an gko Balasi ngham 

Department of electronic systems (IES), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway 

ali .khaleghi@ntnu.no 

Abstract — Brain -Computer Interfaces (BCIs) have 

revolutionized neuroscience applications, from motor 

rehabilitation to neuroergonomics. Traditional implantable 

BCIs with invasive microelectrode arrays pos e challenges, 

notably the ne ed for wired connections and inherent 

implantation risks. This paper introduces a battery -fre e

wireless BCI system, consolidating an implant and its external 

supporting system. Our design centers on a dual -function 

antenna syste m: firstly, an inductive cou pli ng mechanism 

enab les wireless power transfer, sufficiently powering the 

implant’s Application -Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) for 

stimulation and readout without an implant battery. Secondly, 

a backscatter antenna in the i mplant facilitates battery -free ,

high -data -rate wireless connectivity (up to 3 2 Mbps). This 

system not only enhances the BCI experience by eliminating 

wires but also retains data fidelity and energy efficiency, 

promising a safer, more efficient interface f or tasks like robotic 

arm co ntr ol. 

Index Terms — Antenna Design, Brain -Computer 

Interfaces (BCIs), Inductive Coupling, Wireless 

Communication, Wireless Power Transfer .

I. INTRODUCTION 

Brain -Machine Interfaces (BMIs) have revolutionized the 

field of neural en gineering by facilitating di rec t

communication between the brain and external devices. This 

communication is achieved thr ough various techniques, 

including non -invasive methods like 

electroencephalography (EEG), implantable surface 

electrocorticography (EC oG), and micro -electrode arr ays .

Among these, im plantable electrode arrays stand out, having 

transformed neural research by enabling direct interfacing 

with neural tissue and allowin g high -resolution neural 

recording and stimulation. Prominent examples of 

implantable electrode arrays in clude the Utah Electrode 

Array (UEA) by Blackrock Neurotech [1] , Neuronexus 

Probe by NeuroNexus, Silicon Probe Arrays by Atlas 

Neuroengineering [2] , Polytrode Arrays by Cambridge 

NeuroTech, and Neur oPi xels. These devic es have 

showcas ed their prowess in high -density neural recording. 

They have proven particularly adept at decoding neural 

activity related to motor intentions and sensory perception. 

With multi -site recording capabilities, these arrays p erm it 

simultaneous monitoring of ne ural signals from different 

brain areas. Such comprehensiv e recording facilitates the 

development of advanced neuroprosthetic devices, 

expanding applications from neurorehabilitation to motor 

function restoration and robo tic control. Systems like the 

Neuro Port by Blackrock Microsystems now offer detailed 

recordings across nume rous channels at high frequencies. 

These systems capture intricate neural activity, enriching our 

understanding of neural processes and aiding the c rea tion of 

accurate decoding algorithms. Howe ver, these probes 

typically require wired connec tions through a headstage on 

the skull, with signal amplification and data sampling 

executed outside the body. 

The integration of wireless technology could enhance 

im plantable electrode array capabilities, bu t power 

constraints for high -speed data r emain a challenge [3] . Our 

proposition is to employ wireless backscatter for data 

transmis sion, thereby eliminating the implant's active 

transceiver system. By supplementing this with wireless 

power through magnetic cou pling, we aim to establish a 

batte ry -free, high -speed implantab le BMI system. Such a 

system could mitigate risks tied to wired connections and 

pave the way for prolonged recording, closed -loop systems, 

and advanced BMIs. 

This paper outlines our development s under the H2020 

FET -OPEN B-CRATO S European Project . We seek to 

esta blish seamless brain connectivity to external devices in a 

feedback loop for precise control of a prosthetic hand and 

sensory cortex stimulation in a feedback loop. This paper 

details the anten na subsystem's integration w ith the implant 

unit and support sy stem, ensuring robust data transmission 

for both readout and telemetry functions of the implant. 

II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 

The overall concept and configuration of the BMI 

implementation, which is the focus of this work, is illu str ated 

in Fig. 1 . A Utah microelectrode array is set to be implanted 

in the motor cortex and so matosensory areas for non -human 

primate (NHP) experiments. The array is connected to the 

implant's integrated ASIC, wh ich is responsible for neural 

signal amplific ation, channeling, and analog -to -digital 

(ADC) conversion. The 32 -channel Utah electrode array, 

with a sampling rate of 30 KHz per channel , delivers an 

accumulated da ta rate of 32 Mbps for neural recording and 

parallel stimulating cha nnels . High -rate sampl ing ensures 

more accurate intention recording, facilitating the precise 

control of externa l devices. Th e generated data controls the 

implant's integrated backscatter antenna through a binary RF 

switch ing mechani sm. This switching alters the implant 

antenna 's radar cross -section (RCS). Consequently, an 

external reader, operating at a radio freq uency of 434 M Hz, 

can detect changes in the RCS. This process extracts the 

ASIC -produced data from the motor co rtex, provi ding the (a)          

> (b)
> Fig. 1. a) Brain Machine Interf ace (BMI) with a wearable wireless power
> and wireless backscatter units b)Simulati on mode l of the implant and
> external units in a layered tissue

motor information in the external reader. By utilizing this 

appr oach, the implant's power consum ption for dat a

transmission is reduced to t he energy required by the RF 

switch, which consumes only 165 nW. The main power 

consumption within the implant comes from the ASIC, 

estimated to be in the range of 20 -30 mW. Power c an be 

supplied wirelessly through an external source using 

induction couplin g, resulting in minimal power dissipation in 

the tissues. T he wireless powering coil, integrated with the 

backscatter antenna, makes the implant more compact. 

Overall, the implant unit operates without a battery, relying 

on e xternal power. It can simultane ously transmit motor data 

to the reader and receive stimula tion data via the magnetic 

link. 

In ou r design, the antenna system comprises two stacked 

implant antennas. The first is a coil designed to receive 

magnetic flux, conn ected to a wireless management unit that 

regulates programmed voltage and current directed to the 

ASIC. The second is a cross di pole, enhanced with multiple 

patches and equipped with a switch for RCS alternation . The 

external unit features a coil intended for wireless power 

transmission to the implant. Additionally, it includes two bi -

static reader antennas with minimal mutual coup ling, 

optimized for RF backscatter at 434 MHz. 

A. Induction coil design 

We have deve loped a magnetic induction system to 

power th e device. To fit within the ce ramic enclosure of the 

implant, which is a cylinder with a d iameter of 25mm and a 

thickness of 7m m, we have selected planar coils. As depicted 

in Fig. 1-b the modeled electromagnetic simulation system 

incorporates layered tissu es: skin and fat covering the top of 

the implant, and muscl e that mimics the fluids surrounding 

the implant, terminating at the base where the implant 

adher es to the surface of the skull. The distance of the 

imp lant surface to the head surface is only 5 mm as the 

enclosure is placed under the skin. Electromagnetic modeling 

uses the finite eleme nt method (FEM) within the frequency 

domain at 13.56 MHz. The biolo gical tissues are modeled 

using single frequency mater ial properties [4] . This 

frequency aligns with the standard for the near -field coupling 

(NFC) protoc ol. Figure.2a shows the 3D model of the coil 

and the implant where the int egrated implant coil is also 

illustrated To enhance precision, the simulation is also 

conducted using a heterogeneous mod el of the human head, 

ensuri ng accurate representation of both the layers and 

inherent curvatures (Fig. 2 b) .          

> (a)
> (b)
> Fig. 2. a)Positionin gof the external antenna and implant coil c)
> Simulation model using a realistic h uman rep resentation .

At 13.56 MHz, the impedance measurements are as 

follows: the implant impedance 0.77+j48, and the external 

unit impedance is 1.47+j100. With an inter -coil distance of 

14 mm, the ideal po wer coupling is obtained to be -7 dB with 

a matchi ng Q -factor of 14. To counteract the effects of 

frequency splitting —resulting from the close proximity of 

the coils —and maintain power transfer efficiency, we've 

incorporated some loss into the matching cir cuit, leading to a 

revised Q -factor of approximate ly 5. Th e calculated SAR for 

magnetic induction assuming 500mW accepted power is SAR (10g) 0.12 W/Kg for mult ilayer tissues and 0.2 W/kg 

for the heterogenous model. In practi ce, the applied power is 

reduced according to the implant power consumption with 

maximum 300 mW using the telemetry link from the 

implant, thus lesser SAR is expected. We note that the 

standard SAR (10g) <2 W/kg [5] for general public users is 

recommended .

In practical implementation the implant antenna is 

matched to the NTAG 5 NXP po wering u nit where single 

capacitor is used to match the antenna. The data rate for this 

communication and powering unit is maximum 500 Kbps, 

where the bandwidth is suf ficient to handle the data 

connectivity. 

In the context of system integration with the ba ckscatter 

commu nication (as discussed in section B), there is notable 

interference from NFC in the RF backscatter link due to 

intermodu lation effects. To mitigate this, a displacement of 2 

cm is introduced between the wireless power transfer (WPT) 

and the backscatte r reader antennas. Although this 

adjustment limits the power handling capacity to the implant, 

but it adequately supports the up to 30 mW of power needed 

by th e ASIC chip. As the separation dis tance increases, the 

resonance split effect becomes l ess pronou nced, allowing for 

a higher Q -factor matching. It's crucial to arrange a balance 

in the syst em configuration to minimize the impact of both 

systems. 

B. Implant an d External Antennas 

The backscatter reader employs a bi -static radar 

approach, transmit ting an un modulated continuous wave 

(CW) RF signal and receiving reflections from the proximate 

implant antenna. Specifically, the tran smitter system emits a

CW RF in th e ISM band at 434 MHz. A second antenna 

receives a porti on of this emission as the coup ling and t he 

reflected data due to RCS changes . Given the simplicity of 

the implant electronics, which lacks coding and error 

correctio n in its data format, it is vital t o minimize the 

mutual coupling between the transceiver antennas to detect 

the weak dat a signal. W hen antennas are situated closely, the 

coupling between them can be significant, necessitating 

innovative approaches. A prim e solution is to employ 

different p olarizations and spacing between the transmitter 

and re ceiver antennas. The antenna de sign shown in Fig. 3 

uses two meander loop antennas with near field intensity in 

the meander area . The coupling between the antennas is -17 

dB after matching at 435 MHz . The meander line extends the 

antenna physical length in the available small area and 

provides the sufficient coupling in the near field to sense the 

backscatter implant alternations. 

The coupling between the external ante nnas and the 

implant at 15 mm is ap proximately -27 dB (using the model 

in Fig. 2 ) and inde pendent of the implant rotation around its 

vertical axis. The antenna is simulated using heterogenous 

model of human head model. The mutual c oupling of the 

reader ant ennas is slightly reduced to about -22 dB. The 

antenna SAR (10g) is c alculated for the RF system using the 

multilayer tissue model, and using the heterogenous human 

head model at 434 MHz as shown in Fig.4 . The maximum 

SAR (10g) is below 2.7 W/kg using the multilayer tissue on 

the skin, and it is below 1.66 W/kg using the he terogeneous 

model for accepted power of 1 W. The difference is re lated 

to the geometry and the shape difference in the models and 

the effective distance to the head surface. We note that the 

applied power for communication is 100 mW that reduces 

the contin uous SAR to 0.27 W/kg and 0.166 W/kg for the 

multilayer and heter ogeneous model. The small SAR permits 

safe use of the RF backscatter for BMI continuous 

application. The thermal effects i n the electronics should be 

evaluated that would be the main thermal limiting factor. 

The aforementioned antenna system is used in la b

prototypes to demonstrate the feasibility of simultaneous 

wireless power and high data rate communication using 

inductiv e coupling and Rf backscatter. The results of this 

part are presented in [6] where the data rate of 16 Mbps has 

been demonstrated with a BER < 3×10 -3.            

> (a )(b)
> (c) (d)
> Fig. 3. a) Imp lant antenna model b) antenna impedance after matching and
> the coupli ng to the external re ader system antennas c) dual port reader
> antenna for backscatter d) the reader antenna mutual coupling and the
> impedance matchi ng with addition of matching unit.

III. SYS TEM DEMONESTRATION 

The implant unit uses NXP NTAG 5 as the NFC two -wa y

communication and also for WPT to support the implant 30 

mW power and provide required 2.7 volt voltage line to the 

ASIC and the implant supportin g electronics. The 

stimulation data is applied via the NFC link to the implant 

unit, while the NFC is set in continuous charging mode. A 

microcontroller monitors the line voltage and the implant Fig. 4.  Computed SAR at 434 MHz using heterogenous human head  

> model , accepted power level 20 mw.

(a) 

(b) 

(c)                      

> Fig. 5. a) Received backscattered data for 3cm separation between
> implant and external integrated antenna . Each video frame includes 10
> period of each channel waveform that any period includs 30 sample of 16
> bit, represented as a row in image (32×300×1 6 bit=153600 bit) .In this
> frame BER= 3.2× 10 -3.b) 2-Dplot of receive d data, each horizont al grap h
> show related channel data. c)calculated BER of each received frame of
> 153600 bit.

temperature and sends these telemetry data to the external 

reader board , specifically the CLEV6630B, acts as the 

external hub for WPT and bi -directional command/control 

mechanisms. This board acts as a bridge, translating external 

commands to the implant and vice versa. All data 

transmission relies on the NFC link, seamlessly managed by 

the microcontroller. 

Our integrated system, illustrated i n Fig. 5 , underwent a 

loop test. Using an emulator, we generated dummy neural 

data at 24 M bps and directed it to the implant module . The 

external reader antennas are connected to our in -house 

fabricated reader system that supp orts backscatter data 

connectivity of up to 30 Mbps with a standard LAN UDP 

connection. We've developed a Python code to demonstrat e

data in real -time. To ensure quality, we've implemented a 

video representat ion to ga uge transmission accuracy. For 

technica l precision, we based our metrics on 3 2 distinct 

em ulator channels. Each emits a consistent waveform, 

facilitating data matching and error pinpointing. As 

visualized in Fig. 5 -b this data is processed and disp layed in 

real -time. Preliminary tests, with the implant 3 cm away 

from the antenna and a 100 mW external RF transmitter 

input, show s a promising error rate of only 3.29×10 -3 average 

BER. 

(a) (b) 

(c)   

> Fig. 6. a) Imp lanted part of BMI, (a) integra ted manufactured bo ards, (b)
> decomposition model and (c) the implanted main board .

IV. CONCLUSION 

In this study, we presented a robust integration of 

wireless powering via magnetic induction with high -speed 

data communication tai lored for Brain -Machine Interface 

(BMI) applicatio ns. Encased within a compact enclosure, our 

implant harnesses the standardized frequency of 13.56 MHz, 

optimized for near -field coupling (NFC) protocols for 

powering and data telemetry and command, addition ally 

integrated RF backscatter module for 24 Mbps data 

transmission. Rigorous simulations, spanning both multilayer 

and heter ogeneous head m odels, verified the safety and 

efficacy of our approach, consistently maintaining SAR 

levels below the recommended 2 W/kg threshold. 

Our dual -antenna configuration, i ncorporating bi -static radar 

mechanisms and unique meander line designs, achieved a 

remarkable balance between minimized mutual coupling and 

consistent communication at 434 MHz. System tests, 

governed by an integrated command/control framework, 

consistentl y show ed promising results, with an average BER 

of 3.29×10 -3. Such achievements, despite complex 

integration demands, underline the potential of our system in 

pioneering next -generation wireless BMIs. 

ACKNO WLEDGMENT 

The work has been supported by the proj ect Brain -

Connected inteRfAce TO machineS (B -CRATOS), 

(ht tps://www.b -cratos.eu) under grant 965044, Horizon 2020 

FET -OPEN. 

REFERENCES