Title: In silico framework for benchmarking optogenetic hearing restoration

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
In silico framework for benchmarking optogenetic 

# hearing restoration 

Lakshay Khurana 1,2,3,4,5, Petr Nejedly 1,2,6, Daniel J Jagger 7, Tobias Moser 1,2,3,8,9,10 ,11 ,§,

and Lukasz Jablonski 1,2,4,8,11 ,§

> 1

Institute for Auditory Neuroscience, University Medical Center Göttingen (UMG), Göttingen, Germany 

> 2

Auditory Neuroscience and Optogenetics Laboratory, German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany 

> 3

Auditory Neuroscience Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany 

> 4

Junior Research Group “Computational Neuroscience and Neuroengineering”, Göttingen, Germany 

> 5

The doctoral program “Sensory and Motor Neuroscience”, Göttingen Graduate Center for Neurosciences, Biophysics, and Molecular 

Biosciences (GGNB), University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 

> 6

International Max Planck Research School for Neurosciences (IMPRS), Göttingen Graduate School for Neurosciences, Biophysics, 

and Molecular Biosciences (GGNB), University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 

> 7

Centre for Auditory Research, UCL Ear Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom 

> 8

InnerEarLab, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 

> 9

Cluster of Excellence “Multiscale Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to Networks of Excitable Cells” (MBExC), University of 

Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 

> 10

Collaborative Research Center 1690 (CRC1690), University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 

> 11

Else Kröner Fresenius Center for Optogenetic Therapies, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 

§correspondence: tmoser@gwdg.de (T.M.), lukasz.jablonski@wp.eu (L.J.) 

Cochlear implants (CI) partially restore hearing in profoundly hearing impaired 

or deaf people by electrically stimulating the auditory nerve. A bottleneck of 

electrical CIs is the broad spread of electrical current from each electrode that 

limits the transfer of spectral information, which might be overcome by future 

spatially confined optogenetic stimulation. Here we established an in silico 

framework, FraSCO, to model sound encoding in the human cochlea by an 

optogenetic CI (oCI) for testing the potential of optogenetic hearing 

restoration. The biophysical modeling framework combined an optical ray-

tracing model implementing a human cochlea implanted with a waveguide-based 

oCI with a single compartment model of optogenetically modified spiral 

ganglion neurons (SGNs). The input was an optogenetic sound coding strategy 

and the quality of the neural representation was evaluated based on comparison 

of neurograms evoked by optogenetic and electrical stimulation to the 

spectrogram of the sound applied. The model aimed for technologically feasible 

properties of the oCIs with 64 stimulation channels. The biophysical modeling 

framework successfully captured essential physiological features of optogenetic 

SGN stimulation with a minimal set of ion channel types expressed in the SGN 

soma. Working with a sample of 1000 SGNs distributed along the tonotopic 

axis to represent sound encoding, we found that improved spectral selectivity 

more than compensates for lower temporal fidelity of current implementations 

of optogenetic stimulation. The established computational framework enables in 

silico investigation and benchmarking of sound encoding in the cochlea by 

future oCI and state-of-the-art eCI. The results indicate that optogenetic sound 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 1/26 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint encoding has potential to improve speech understanding in noisy environments 

for CI users. 

Introduction 

Neuroprosthetics, the field at the intersection of neuroscience and engineering, has wit -

nessed remarkable progress in recent decades, empowering individuals with severe neurolo  -

gical conditions to lead more independent and fulfilling lives [ 1,2]. Cochlear implants (CIs), 

devices that partially restore hearing for individuals with profound hearing impairment or 

deafness by directly stimulating the auditory nerve, exemplify this progress. Since their in  -

ception in the 1950s, CIs have undergone continuous advancements, with refined sound 

processing algorithms and intracochlear array designs enabling recipients to perceive 

speech, music, and environmental sounds with increasing clarity and complexity maximally 

[3–5]. 

While the CIs have remarkably improved the lives of its users, these devices also have lim -

itations. The current state-of-the-art electrical CIs (eCIs) stimulate the auditory nerve by 

delivering electrical pulses inside the electrically conductive medium of the cochlea. This 

leads to a wide spread of electrical current and it limits the number of perceptually inde -

pendent electrodes to typically less than 10 [ 6–10 ].  This restricts their ability to provide 

spectral (frequency) information to the brain explaining difficulties of eCI users in under  -

standing speech in noisy environments and appreciating music  [3,11 –15 ].

The development of new technologies and sound processing strategies is crucial to address 

these limitations and further enhance the performance of CIs. One promising approach in  -

volves the use of optogenetics [ 14 ]. The optogenetic CIs (oCIs), which use light pulses in -

stead of electrical pulses, would offer improved transfer of spectral information as light can 

be better confined in space when compared to the electrical current [ 14 –18 ]. This promises 

improved speech recognition and music appreciation. 

Despite good progress and promising preclinical data, oCI development faces several chal  -

lenges such as the relatively slow kinetics of optogenetic stimulation. The chan  -

nelrhodopsins (ChRs), used for rendering SGNs light sensitive, do not allow faithful re  -

sponses to stimulation beyond 200 –300 pulses per second (pps) [ 19 –22 ]. Efforts to optimize 

ChRs for faster stimulation are underway, but one important question is whether the im  -

proved spectral selectivity benefits CI users in terms of speech intelligibility given the cur  -

rently achievable firing rates? Addressing this question is critical before moving on toward 

clinical trials on the oCIs. With the framework we present in this paper, we offer an ap -

proach that bridges preclinical and future clinical studies by using computational models to 

predict the intelligibility that could be achieved with oCIs and compare it to the one with 

eCIs.    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ2/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Computational models have been used in the development of CIs since the 1970s as a 

powerful tool for understanding the underlying mechanisms of hearing restoration and to 

accelerate the development of more effective implant designs and sound coding strategies 

(for reviews of computational models in CI research see ref.  23 –25 ). These models aim to 

recapitulate the function of the auditory system at varying depth, allowing researchers to 

investigate various aspects of CI operation, such as electrode-neural interface, neural en  -

coding on the predicted outcome performance and individual outcome variation. 

By combining the stage-specific models with sound coding strategies, computational frame  -

works can be formed to investigate broad research topics, as has been done to predict 

speech intelligibility [ 26 –29 ]. In this paper, we present a modular framework to predict in -

formation transmission from sound to spikes for optical and electrical stimulation called 

FraSCO (framework for sound coding optimization). The framework includes simulation of 

CI sound coding strategies, prediction of spatial spread of current and light, a single-com  -

partment SGN model including voltage-gated channels and a ChR for optogenetic activa -

tion, and a similarity index to compare the information in spikes to the sound spectrogram. 

Methods 

Framework structure 

A modular framework structure with the stages of (1) sound processing, (2) optical or elec  -

trical stimulation, (3) spiral ganglion neurons, and (4) analysis of neural code. ( Figure 1 ;

each stage is described in the following sections) was implemented in MATLAB R2021a 

(The MathWorks Inc.), unless stated otherwise. 

Sound processing and stimulation strategy: the n-of-m strategy 

Any implementation of a sound coding strategy, either a clinical, experimental, or concep -

tual one, can be used in this stage block. We implemented a generic eCI strategy,  n-of-m

(the generic form of the Advanced Combined Encoder, ACE, strategy  [30 ]), which forms 

the basis of most clinical strategies currently in use. All parameters, necessary for testing a 

variety of inputs, such as pulse rate, pulse width, total number of channels (  m), maximum 

number of channels stimulated per frame ( n), and maximum stimulus amplitude can be 

varied in the implementation. 

The strategy (1) samples the audio in frames, (2) applies a pre-emphasis filter, (3) filters 

the signal through  m number of infinite impulse response gammatone filters, (4) calculates 

the energy in all filter outputs, (5) selects the maximum  n filters with highest energies, (6) 

maps the energy using loudness growth function, threshold and comfort levels, and (7) gen -

erates the electrodogram, in case of eCIs, and emittogram, in case of oCIs.    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ3/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Cochlear stimulation by current and light 

The output values ( z) of the sound processing which ranged from 0 to 255 was mapped to 

amplitudes ( A) using the equation 

A=10 ⋅(I max 

10 ) z 

> 255

(1) 

where the maximum intensity ( Imax ) was set for current to 1750  μA and for light to 

200  mW for the simulations presented. 

The spread of current and light from the source to the neurons was estimated using 

already published data  [15 ]. An optical ray-tracing model, implemented in TracePro 

Standard 7.8.1 (Lambda Research Corporation), predicted the spread of light using three 

different light sources, namely, LEDs, Laser-coupled waveguides with numerical aperture 

(NA) 0.5 and 0.17, in a human cochlea model. We had previously compared the spatial 

spread of light with the current spread [ 15 ] and provided a detailed description of the 

model and measurement of the spatial spread of stimulation. Here, we used the median val  -

ues of the spread of light from oCI waveguide outcoupling structures (NA 0.5) and eCI 

electrodes, and calculated spread at 1000 neurons across the tonotopic axis. We note that 

the framework can readily accommodate other sets of spatial spread of stimulation for eval  -

uation of the effect of different light emitter properties or various electrode configurations. 

Biophysical single compartment model of SGNs 

We developed an extended Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) model using Markov kinetic formalism in 

Python 3.8 programming language. The SGN model is described as 

d V m

d t =− 1

C m

⋅(I Na +I LVAK +I HVAK +I HCN +I Chronos +I Leak ) (2) 

where the  INa , ILVAK , IHVAK , and  IHCN  are the individual ion currents of voltage-gated so -

dium (Na), low-voltage activated potassium (LVAK), high-voltage activated potassium 

(HVAK), and hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels, respect -

ively. Additionally,  IChronos  is the current from the Chronos model for optogenetic stimula -

tion  [31 ]. These ion currents are computed for an ion channel  x as: 

I x =gx ⋅P O, x ⋅(V m −E x ) (3) 

where  gx represents the maximal conductance of the ion chann el,  Ex is t he channel reversal 

potential, and  PO, x is the probability of being in open state. This probability is computed 

using Markov models. 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 4/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The sodium channel consisted of six states—four closed (C), one open (O), and one inac  -

tivated (I)—as described by Tveito and Lines (2016) [ 32 ]. The equations for transition rate 

parameters were adopted from the same literature source. Similarly, LVAK, HVAK, and 

HCN were modelled as CCCCOI (without a loop), CCCCO, and CO Markov models. The 

models and equations are provided as  Supplementary Information  (Supplementary Figure 

2). In order to fit the parameters of the channel models to the currents of SGNs, we used 

patch-clamp recordings from SGNs isolated from the mouse cochlea around the onset of 

hearing described in Smith et al. (2015) [ 33 ] and Browne et al. (2017) [ 34 ]. Fitting em -

ployed an optimization routine, consisting of differential evolution genetic algorithm and 

leave-one-out cross-validation. As the recordings were conducted at room temperature (22– 

24°C) and we run the model for body temperature (37°C), the transition rates were multi  -

plied with respective  Q10  factors ( Supplementary Table 1 ). The open-state probability  PO, x

in  Equation 3  was obtained as the fraction of channels in the open (O) state of the Markov 

models. More information about the model parameterization and the  Q10  factors is 

provided in the  Supplementary Information .

The biophysical HH model described here was designed to accommodate both electrical and 

optical stimulation. However, to achieve higher spike probabilities specific to optogenetic 

stimulation, we developed an additional Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) model tailored for 

this purpose [ 35 ]. 

Analysis of neural code: Sound-to-Neuron Information Transmission Index 

In order to represent the neural response to oCI or eCI stimulation, the spike raster plot 

was converted to a spike intensity plot by assigning a value to each element of the matrix 

equal to the average spikes in a small window centered at that element. This was mathem -

atically described as 

X ij =

# ∑    

> i , j = −a
> 2,−s
> 2
> a
> 2, s
> 2

x ij 

2⋅a ⋅s ⋅ F pps 

F s

(4) 

where  x is the spike raster plot and  X is the spike intensity matrix with values obtained by 

averaging the window of  a neurons and  s samples,  Fpps  is the stimulation rate, and  Fs is 

the sampling frequency. 

The spectrogram of the input audio ( S) was then compared to this matrix ( X) using the in-

built function in MATLAB for the Structural Similarity Index measure (SSIM). It com  -

putes a score on various windows using 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 5/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

SSIM ( S , X )= (2 μS μX +c1)⋅(2 σSX +c2)

# (μS 

> 2

+ μX 

> 2

+C 1)⋅(σS 

> 2

+σ X 

> 2

+c2) (5) 

The SSIM score is a good measure to compare different parameter sets of processing the 

same  input audio. However, this raw similarity score reflects both the signal and silence 

similarities. Silence within an audio file can artificially inflate similarity scores, leading to 

biased results that do not accurately reflect the true similarity based on the signal of the 

audio. To isolate the contribution of silence, a reference score was calculated for each file 

using a raster plot with no evoked spikes ( X0). The final score was fit on a sigmoid curve 

centered around the reference score, which is the score when there is no stimulation, effect -

ively removing the bias introduced by varying amounts of silence, yielding a normalized 

score that more accurately reflects the true content similarity. We termed this measure 

“Sound-to-Neuron Information Transmission Index” (SNITI), and it is computed as 

SNITI= 11+e −10 ⋅(SSIM ( S , X )−SSIM ( S , X 0 )) (5) 

SNITI score of 0.5 represents no stimulation. Higher values indicate higher similarity 

between input audio and sound coding output. Lower values indicate more noise than the 

input audio. 

Dataset 

A speech corpus  [36 ] containing audio files of single words (such as “character”, “glass”, 

“strategy”, “plant”, and “thin”), was used for the analysis described in the section  Exem -

plary applications of the framework . The corpus consists of 50 words from a male speaker 

and 50 words uttered by a female speaker, out of which 20 files were selected at random 

from each speaker. Silent beginning and end longer than 10 ms were clipped to save pro -

cessing time. The corpus contains high-quality (256 kbps bitrate) recordings at a high 

sampling rate of 48 kHz with very low background noise. We resampled the audio files at 

100  kHz. 

Statistical analysis 

To compare the performance of eCI and oCI across various stimulation rates, a two-way 

ANOVA was performed. The two factors considered were the stimulation rate and stimula -

tion type (electrical or optical). The interaction between these two factors was als  o evalu -

ated. The data were normally distributed, and the assumptions of ANOVA were checked 

and met. 

Following the two-way ANOVA, a post hoc analysis was performed using the in-built 

‘multcompare’ function of MATLAB to examine pairwise comparisons across both dimen -

sions, comparing eCI and oCI performance across all stimulation rates. 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 6/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Results 

The framework of predicting sound to neuron transmission of information 

To predict the transmission of auditory information from sound to neural firing we de  -

veloped a modular framework for modeling optical as well as electrical SGN stimulation 

(Figure 1 ). The input audio is transformed by the sound processing stage to generate a se -

quence of current or light pulses which are spread-out spatially along the tonotopic axis 

(i.e. in the frequency domain). SGN somata located in the Rosenthal’s canal of the cochlear 

modiolus respond to the stimulation and the ensuing spike patterns are used to compare 

the activity with the spectrogram of the input audio. This comparison is done using a new 

measure SNITI—Sound-to-Neuron Information Transmission Index (see  Methods )—based 

on Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM). 

Figure  1. Overview on the complete framework.  An audio file is read from a dataset and resampled at 

100  kHz. Either the clean signal or a noisy signal (at a set SNR) serves as input to the sound coding strategy 

block. Here, the signal is sampled in frames and processed with n-of-m strategy, with  m total channels out of 

which  n active channels with highest energy in the frame are selected for stimulation. The electrodogram/ 

emittogram output of coding strategy block determines how the current/light spreads in the cochlea along 

the tonotopic axis using the Gaussian spread values from Jürgens et al. (2018) [ 37 ] and Khurana et al. (2022) 

[15 ]. The output is a matrix of current/light values at the spiral ganglion neurons. The SGN model is an ex -

tended Hodgkin-Huxley model with Markov kinetics formulation. The ChR model is integrated in the SGN 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 7/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

model for optical stimulation. Additionally, a simpler and faster, Leaky Integrate-and-Fire model is imple -

mented for the optical stimulation with higher spike probabilities. The output of the 1000 SGNs composes a 

spike raster plot evoked by optical or electrical stimulation. Finally, a similarity index is computed by com  -

paring the spike intensity and spectrogram from the clean audio. The framework is modular and any block 

can be replaced with a different model, for example, a new sound coding strategy could be implemented .

Sound processing 

All sub-blocks are identical for electrical and optical stimulation except for the pulse shape. 

Biphasic pulses of 60  μs per phase are generated for electrical stimulation, whereas the op -

tical stimulation uses monophasic pulses of 1  ms. A comparison of the output of sound 

processing for electrical and optical stimulation is provided in  Supplementary Information 

(Supplementary Figure 3 ). 

Response to electrical and optical stimulation 

The HH SGN model ( Figure 2  A) was assembled from 4 different channel types: voltage-

gated sodium channels (NaV), low-voltage and high-voltage activated potassium channels 

(LVAK and HVAK, respectively), as well as hyperpolarization and cyclic nucleotide-activ  -

ated channels (HCN), as described in the respective  Methods  subsection.  Figure 2  B exem -

plifies the model by showing the fits of the NaV channel model to NaV currents recorded 

from mouse SGNs [ 34 ] and the plots for other channels are provided in  Supplementary Fig -

ure 2 . Action potential firing of the SGN was fitted to the extended experimental data 

from Rutherford et al. (2012) [ 38 ]to optimize the remaining parameters of conductance and 

capacitance. The model’s response was well-correlated with the recorded traces, as demon -

strated in the examples in  Figure 2  C for increasing ramp stimuli with different maximum 

amplitudes and different durations. Finally, an existing 8-state Markov model of Chronos 

[31 ] was integrated to the SGN model to drive spiking by optogenetic stimulation with the 

fastest native ChR reported thus far [ 21 ,39 ]. To validate the optical stimulation of the 

model, we compared the spike probabilities at various stimulation rates of the modeled 

neuron with the average spike probabilities recorded by Keppeler et al. [ 21 ] ( Figure 2  D). 

The comparison revealed a strong correlation, with both the HH model and the recorded 

data showing a gradual decrease in spike probability as the pulse rate increased from 20 

pps to 900 pps. Additionally, a Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron model was imple -

mented with higher spike probabilities which captured the firing of the fastest SGN re  -

sponse recorded with Chronos [ 21 ]. This approach allowed us to do the simulations for the 

currently achievable average light-driven firing behavior of SGNs, as well as for faster SGN 

firing that are realistic and attainable with future advancements. 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 8/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure  2. Development and behavior of  the SGN model for electrical and optical stimulation . (A)  Illustration 

of the single-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) model of the SGN. The model consists of voltage-gated 

sodium (Na V), low-voltage activated potassium (LVAK), high-voltage activated potassium (HVAK), and hy -

perpolarization-activated and cyclic nucleotide–gated (HCN) channels. In addition, a channelrhodopsin, 

Chronos, was added for optical activation.  (B)  Example fitting of Na V channel parameters using Markov ki -

netics formalism. The Markov model and equations are described in  Supplementary Information  (Supplemen -

tary Figure 2 ).  (i)  Voltage clamp protocol (top) and corresponding recorded data (bottom) calculated as 

mean from ten cells.  (ii)  Correlation of recorded data from the experiment and response of the model. Black 

line corresponds to the final model. The green area shows maximum and minimum correlations from all 

leave-one-out cross-validations.  (iii)  Response of the model (dashed lines) for the same voltage clamp protocol 

as shown in  (i) , overlaid on the recorded data (faded lines).  (C)  Example fitting of the complete SGN model 

for electrical stimulation. Current clamp protocol (top) of increasing ramp stimuli with  (i)  changing maxi -

mum amplitudes  and  (ii)  changing durations, and responses (bottom) from the recorded SGN (faded lines) 

and the model (dashed lines). The timepoint of zero indicates the onset of the ramp.  (D)  Spike probability 

for optical stimulation of the SGN for increasing pulse rate. The model data are compared to the published 

data [ 21 ]. The spike probabilities of HH model show a correlation to the mean from the recordings of 40 pu -

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 9/26   

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint tative SGNs (obtained from 6 mice). The spike rate of the fastest unit recorded was 100% at 200 pulses/sec -
> ond and decreased to ~60% at 300 pulses/second. The Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) model follows this pat -
> tern of spike probability. The stimuli for the model simulation had 1 ms long rectangular pulses at an inten -
> sity of 100 mW .

Comparison of input and output 

In this final step, the spike raster plot generated by the neuron model is compared to the 

spectrogram of the input audio. Several studies  have previously established that SSIM, 

which was originally designed to compare similarity of two images, can be used to compare 

two neurograms and to predict speech intelligibility [ 40 –43 ]. The SSIM or SSIM-derived 

measures, such as, Neurogram Similarity Index measure (NSIM), compare one ‘clean’ or 

‘original’ neurogram to a ‘degraded’ or ‘processed’ neurogram. In our case, we would like to 

compare two processed raster plots, which contains only binary values, with the spectro -

gram of input audio. To do so, we used the SNITI measure described in the  Methods  sec -

tion. 

When there is no stimulation, a score 0.5 would be achieved. Higher values indicate higher 

similarity to the input audio and lower score mean more noise than the input audio. A 

value of 0.5 can also be obtained with stimulation when the amount of ‘similar’ informa -

tion is balanced by the amount of noise. The SNITI scores may not linearly correlate with 

subjective intelligibility scores, however, we are using the measure for relative comparison 

only. 

Exemplary applications of the framework 

We employed the framework to investigate the effect of the number of stimulation sites, 

the stimulation rate, and noise on SNITI scores for electrical and optical stimulation. For 

the description of dataset used for these simulations, please see the  Methods  section. 

Effect of the number of stimulation sites 

The total number,  m, was limited to a maximum of 20 for eCI because of the interleaved 

stimulation at high pulse rate with pulse width of 60 μs, whereas, parallel stimulation of 

oCI allowed high number of emitters that we scaled up to 64 emitters. The total number of 

channels ( m, electrodes in case of eCI and emitters in case of oCI) was gradually increased 

and the number of active electrodes/emitters ( n) was varied from 4 to 16 for the eCI and 

up to 64 for the oCI. The pulse rate was set to 900 pps for eCI and 150 pps for oCI (HH 

model). The SNITI score increased for eCI with increased  m, but for a fixed  m, the score 

did not show improvement above 10 active channels, saturating around 0.75 score (  Figure 

3 A). This correlates with observations in eCI users with the most eCI configuration (mid-

scala electrode, monopolar stimulation) who do not show improvement in speech under  -

standing above 8 or 10 channels [ 6–10 ]. The scores for oCI for the same  n and  m pairs were 

lower than for eCI, which likely reflects the lower stimulation rate of 150 pps. When the    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ10/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

total number of channels were increased for oCI, the SNITI scores improved and reached a 

maximum of 0.71 for 48-of-64 configuration ( Figure 3  B). 

Figure  3. Effect of the total number of stimulation sites ( m), maximum number of stimulation sites per 

frame ( n), and stimulation rate on similarity index . (A)  Sound-to-Neuron Information Transmission Index 

(SNITI) scores as obtained from the framework for a dataset of 40 audio files of single words, with various 

combinations of number of stimulation sites ( m) and number of maximum active channels per frame ( n). The 

same sound processing parameters were used for the simulation of eCI (in blue) and oCI (in red), except that 

the stimulation rate and pulse duration were 900 pps and 60 us for eCI and 90 pps and 1 ms for oCI.  (B) 

SNITI scores for extended combination sets of  n and  m for oCIs as the parallel/simultaneous stimulation of 

multiple light emitters offers greater number of  m. (C)  SNITI scores for increasing stimulation rate of eCI (in 

blue), oCI with HH neuron model (in red), and oCI with LIF neuron model (in green). The  n-of-m was fixed 

to 10-of-20 for eCI and 32-of-64 for oCI. Statistical significance (*** for p<0.001) or non-significance (n.s.) is 

indicated only for selected post hoc comparisons, namely, the eCI at 900 pps with certain oCI configurations 

of the LIF model. The absence of a significance marker does not imply a lack of significance or relevance. 

Also, the scores for oCI with LIF model were significantly higher than eCI for the same stimulation rates 

above 50 pps. Each box plot shows the median, upper quartile and lower quartile. The whiskers extend to the 

minimum and maximum values excluding the outliers (not shown). 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 11/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

A potentially lower stimulation rate in oCI can be traded-off with higher spectral resolution 

The effect of stimulation rate was evaluated at pulse rates of 50, 80, 120, 150, 300, 500 and 

900 pps ( Figure 3  C). The  n-of-m were fixed to 10-of-20 for eCI and 32-of-64 for oCI. 

We found that the median score of oCI with HH model was highest at 150 pps and the 

scores did not show a significant improvement over eCI scores. With the LIF model, we ex  -

panded the predictive capacity of our framework with the SGNs capable of more faithful 

stimulation at rates beyond 150  pps, as observed in some in-vivo recordings [ 21 ]. At low 

spike rates, the LIF model and the HH model exhibited the same behavior in terms of 

SNITI scores. However, due to greater spike probabilities at higher pulse rates, oCI stimu  -

lation results with the LIF model outperformed not only the scores with HH model as well 

as the eCI scores. The two-way ANOVA between eCI and oCI (LIF model) revealed signi  -

ficant effects for both the stimulation rate (p<0.001) and stimulation type (p<0.001). Ad  -

ditionally, the interaction between stimulation rate and implant type was significant 

(p<0.01), indicating that the effect of stimulation rate on performance varied depending on 

the type of cochlear implant. Post hoc comparisons revealed that the oCI consistently out  -

performed eCI across all stimulation rates (p<0.01 for 100 pps, p<0.001 for 120, 150, 500 

and 900 pps, p<0.05 for 300 pps) except for 50 pps. Notably, the performance of eCI at the 

highest stimulation rate of 900 pps did not differ significantly from that of oCI at 150 pps 

or 300 pps. However, eCI at 900 pps performed significantly worse than oCI at 500 pps 

(p<0.001) and at 900 pps (p<0.001). Additionally, in agreement with the literature on psy  -

choacoustic tests with eCI users, where the score typically plateaus beyond 300 pps except 

for a few subjects [ 9,44 –46 ], the simulated eCI performance at 900 pps had no significant 

differences to that of 300 or 500 pps. 

While clinical eCIs operate at higher pulse rates but achieve spike probabilities of only 

about 10% to 20% [ 47 ], optically activated SGNs can attain spike probabilities as high as 

60% at a stimulation rate of 300 pps [ 21 ], resulting in firing rates comparable to the elec -

trical stimulation at 900 pps. Moreover, the improved spectral selectivity of oCIs likely 

contributes to the enhanced performance observed in simulations with the LIF model. 

Noise impacts oCIs less drastically than eCIs 

It is important to note that the dataset used for these simulations is high-quality and al  -

most noiseless. This can be equated with psychoacoustic testing of CI users in a quiet lab 

environment, where they are known to achieve high understanding of speech. Real-world 

situations are rarely without any noise, and eCI users struggle with understanding speech 

in noisy environments. Therefore, we evaluated the effect of added noise and compared it 

for eCI and oCI (with the HH model;  Figure 4 ). White noise was added to each audio file 

in the dataset using the in-built function, ‘awgn’, of MATLAB. The signal-to-noise ratio 

(SNR) was gradually decreased from +20  dB  to  −20  dB. Median SNITI scores were calcu -

lated and a linear fit was done to find the slope. The scores decreased at a rate of    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ12/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

0.017  dB –1 for eCI, whereas for oCI the decrease at 0.009 dB –1  was almost half of the slope 

for eCI. In light of these results, potential oCI users are predicted to be less impacted with 

noisy backgrounds, already with the state-of-the-art opsins, and would will likely experi  -

ence further improvement with optimized ChR and more sophisticated sound coding 

strategies. 

Figure  4. Effect of changing Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) on similarity index . White noise was systematically 

added to each audio file at SNR from +20 to –20  dB, in steps of 5  dB. Each noisy file was analyzed with the 

framework to compute the similarity index, SNITI. Data points for each file are plotted as a connected line 

for eCI (in light blue) and for oCI with the HH model (in light red). The values were adjusted to start the 

line at zero on y-axis for easy visual comparison. The best linear fit on the median had a slope of 0.017 and 

0.009 dB –1  for eCI and oCI, respectively .

Discussion 

The major limitation of eCIs is the low number of perceptually different channels, due to 

the wide spread of current in the cochlea [ 6–10 ]. Studies with electrophysiological record -

ings in the inferior colliculus of mouse [ 14 ,16 ] and gerbil [ 17 ,18 ] and computational models 

[15 ] have previously shown that the spectral spread of excitation is much lower for optical 

stimulation than electrical stimulation. But how this improvement would translate to 

speech understanding, remained unanswered. Here, we have presented a computational 

framework for prediction and comparison of speech information at the level of auditory 

nerve fibers after stimulation with eCI and oCI. The framework is a chain of modular 

blocks of CI sound processing, current and light spread, SGN response, and a similarity in  -

dex. The sound processing block was developed based on generic  n-of-m coding strategy. 

The spatial spread of excitation was calculated using existing models and data. The SGN 

response was predicted using a biophysical model of optogenetically modified SGNs, con -

structed by fitting ion-channel models to electrophysiological recordings. The information 

of the neural firing across the tonotopic range was compared to the sound spectrogram us  -

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 13/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ing a similarity index, SNITI, based on an existing similarity measure, SSIM. Using the 

framework, we compared the SNITI scores for eCIs and oCIs for a variety of number of 

total channels and number of maximum active channels in a frame of stimulation, the 

stimulation rate, and the addition of noise. 

Several modelling efforts have been presented in the past to answer a variety of questions 

related to the eCIs [ 23 ,26 –29 ,48 ,49 ], however, up to our knowledge, our framework is the 

first one to simulate electrical as well as optogenetic stimulation in the same model frame -

work. The major benefit of the framework would be to assist the development of oCIs by 

narrowing down the parameters of the light sources and by guiding the development of 

opsins. Moreover, oCI-specific sound coding strategies could be investigated using the 

presented framework. 

Framework application 

As an application of the framework, we simulated the eCI and varied the number of chan -

nels to reproduce the limitation of perceptually different channels. We found no improve  -

ment in the similarity measure for maximum number of channels above 10 for eCI, in 

agreement with the psychophysical studies with eCI users [ 6–10 ]. The scores for oCI, how -

ever, continued to gradually increase up to 48 channels, demonstrating the advantage of 

higher spectral resolution. This advantage is clearer when comparing the electrical and op  -

tical stimulation at different stimulation rates. The oCI, modeled with attainable fast stim -

ulation, with higher spectral resolution (32 active channels) performed significantly better 

than eCI at same stimulation rates. Also, oCI (LIF model) at stimulation rates of 150 and 

300 pps achieved comparable performance to eCI at 900 pps, indicating the trade-off 

between the spectral and temporal resolution of the stimulation. One reason for this trade-

off, other than the increased spectral selectivity of the oCI, is the comparable firing rates of 

oCI at 300 pps (with ~60% spike probability for the LIF model) and of eCI at 900 pps 

(with ~20% spike probability [ 47 ]). Although the promising results of the simulations are 

based on the neuron model characterized by fast dynamics (LIF neuron model), it is reas  -

onable to predict that these outcomes could be achieved and further optimized with the de  -

velopment of improved opsins that offer even faster temporal fidelity and better transduc  -

tion. Recordings of optogenetically driven firing from single putative SGNs suggest that 

Chronos, the fastest naturally occurring ChR, as well as f-Chrimson and vf-Chrimson do 

not enable reliable spiking at  300  Hz (average spike probability of  10–20 % [ 19 ,21 ,22 ]). We 

reason that non-optimal membrane targeting, low single channel conductance (probably 

around  40  fS for all three ChRs), closing kinetics (from  0.8 ms for Chronos to  3 ms for f-

Chrimson) and recovery of light-driven SGN firing during the interstimulus interval [  22 ] all 

contribute to limit the temporal fidelity of optogenetic sound encoding. Additionally, the 

integration of a dedicated sound coding strategy tailored to the unique properties of opto  -

genetic stimulation could enhance performance, potentially making optical stimulation an 

even more viable alternative to conventional eCIs.    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ14/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The high light intensity threshold of the opsins in another crucial factor hindering the de  -

velopment of oCIs. In our model, the light sources had a maximum power of 200  mW, 

which is currently a challenge for laser, waveguide, and battery technologies to build such 

light sources with high power efficiency and small form factor. In recent studies, light 

probes have been fabricated using flexible waveguides with output power of up to 13  mW 

and 33% optical efficiency with  20  μm outcoupling structure [ 50 ], and using vertical-cavity 

surface emitting lasers with up to 50  mW power for 450  μm long semiconductor chip [ 51 ]. 

These light intensities are far below the intensity used in our simulations. While the future 

iterations of the SGN model with more realistic channel expression and multiple compart -

ments may show a reduction in light intensity requirements, nevertheless, developing ChRs 

conveying higher light sensitivity to SGN firing and improving optical stimulation techno -

logies remain important objectives. This could, for example, partially be tackled with a 

stimulation strategy based on ultrashort pulselets which are integrated by the SGNs [ 22 ]. 

A discussion on the energy budget of oCIs has been presented in ref.  52 .

Background noises interfere with speech and make it challenging for CI users to filter the 

useful information. While modern CIs have noise reduction algorithms which may show an 

improvement in speech understanding in noise in a controlled, lab environment, they do 

not benefit from this in daily-life situations [ 53 –55 ] and some aggressive noise suppression 

method may even have detrimental effect on listening when the target sound is identified 

as noise [ 55 ]. The speech understanding, naturally, decreases with decrease of SNR for CI 

users; however, our framework predicted this degradation to be greater for eCI than oCI. 

The reason behind this effect could be the combination of two factors—greater number of 

stimulation sites and narrower spread of stimulation than eCI—which allows recruitment 

of more stimulation sites where useful information is transmitted and less spread of noise 

compared [ 56 ]. Additionally, the richness and complexities of music cannot be fully cap -

tured and transmitted to the SGN with eCIs; therefore, another potential benefit of high 

spectral resolution of oCIs would be the music appreciation, which was not evaluated in 

this study. 

Limitations and outlook 

The framework presented here aimed to model an average behavior of eCI and oCI stimu  -

lation. The parameters of the models approximate the vast complexity of the system. Al  -

though adding more complexities require making more assumptions, certain sections of the 

framework can nevertheless be “upgraded”. 

We implemented a generic sound coding strategy (n-of-m) which could be replaced with a 

specific clinical CI strategy, such as, HiRes120 which uses current steering to create virtual 

channels between the physical electrode contacts (however, this would only change the fo  -

cus of stimulation, not the spatial spread). Due to its modular design, our framework    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ15/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

serves as a tool for the further studies on the development and optimization of such coding 

strategies. 

The computational models rely on various assumptions and approximations to simplify the 

simulations of the vastly complex nature of the biological system and the interactions 

between light/current and tissue. For example, (a) the neuron locations and density were 

not obtained from imaging data, rather the neurons were placed equidistantly along the 

centerline of the RC, however, their density is non-uniform across different regions of the 

cochlea with highest density in the middle region [ 57 ], (b) an “average” model of Type-I 

SGNs was designed whereas the Type-I SGNs have different subpopulations of high, me -

dium or low spontaneous discharge rate [ 58 ,59 ], (c) the Type-II SGNs—forming 5–10% of 

the SGN population  [60 ,61 ]—were not included in the model, (d) the current interactions 

between the electrode contacts were not considered, only the spread was computed, most 

likely resulting in higher similarity scores, and (e) a simplified point-like SGN model was 

developed, potentially limiting the ability to capture its full complexity. 

Moreover, the whole framework relies on the parameter estimates from experimental stud -

ies, which may be subject to uncertainty and variability. For instance, (a) estimates of 

light scattering and absorption coefficients may vary across different measurement setups, 

(b) estimates of ion channels’ kinetics and opsin expression levels may vary across different 

experimental conditions and cells, and (c) neural response thresholds may vary across dif  -

ferent stimulation protocols and animal models. All these factors lead to uncertainty in the 

predictions of the computational models. 

Although our neuron model implementation takes advantage of vectorization and multi-

threading processing, the HH model still has a major impact on computation time ( Supple -

mentary Figure 3 ). A more efficient method could be implemented by either using a phe  -

nomenological back-end to the biophysical model [ 28 ] or by training a convolutional neural 

network for a variety of stimuli. 

Furthermore, we proposed the similarity index, SNITI, for relative qualitative comparison 

of different parameter sets in the framework. To transfer the SNITI scores to intelligibility 

scores, clinical evaluation could be done by using the same dataset and parameters with 

eCI users. For the evaluation of speech-in-noise, we used white noise, but in daily life, CI 

users would come across different noises, such as factory floor, classroom, cafeteria, steady 

state, and multi-talker babble noise. While, these could be evaluated in the framework, the 

SNITI score might not be a good measure for all noise types. Especially for the noises 

which overlap in the frequency domain with the target sound, the SNITI measure—which 

looks for correlation with sound spectrograph rather than intelligible information—could 

categorize some noise as target because the SGN spikes that resulted from noise might 

match the sound spectrograph.    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ16/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Conclusions 

A computational framework was constructed by assembling the models for processes from 

sound to spikes to predict the similarity in the sound and SGN activity for stimulation 

with eCI and oCI. The proposed framework could be used to investigate questions and 

evaluate parameters of sound processing strategies, ChR development and medical device 

development, as well as, for prediction of relative speech understanding for such paramet -

ers. The framework is not limited by the practical constraints of technological limitations 

and clinical studies. The applications presented in this study predicted that even when as -

suming a lower temporal fidelity of sound coding in oCIs this is balanced by the higher 

spectral resolution, even without a dedicated sound coding strategy which can maximize 

this benefit. In addition, the simulations predicted lower impact of noise in oCIs than in 

eCIs. In future work, the framework can be expanded for more realistic models and stimuli. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank Dr. Andreas Neef, Dr. Lorcan Browne, and Dr. Katie 

Smith for discussions on SGN model development and Antonia Klobe for testing and feed  -

back on the framework. The speech corpus was provided by Timur Baytukalov (EasyPro -

nounciation.com). The work was funded by the European Research Council (ERC) through 

the Advanced Grant “OptoHear” under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and 

Innovation program (grant agreement 670759), the Proof of Concept project “OptoWave” 

(grant agreement 101113433) and European Innovation Council project “OptoWavePro” 

(grant agreement 101158920) (to T.M.), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Ger -

man Research Foundation) via the Leibniz Program (MO896/5) and the Cluster of Excel  -

lence (EXC2067) Multiscale Bioimaging (to T.M.), the Volkswagen Foundation via the 

SPRUNG program (to T.M.), and the Else Kröner Fresenius Foundation via the Else 

Kröner Fresenius Center for Optogenetic Therapies (to T.M. and L.J.). This work was also 

supported by the Ernst Jung Prize for Medicine, the Fondation Pour l’Audition (FPA; 

RD-2020-10 to T.M.), and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council 

(BBSRC; BB/M019322/1 to D.J.). 

Author contributions 

L.K., L.J., and TM designed the study. L.K. implemented the framework. P.N. contributed 

to the development of the HH model of the SGN. D.J. provided the electrophysiological 

data for the SGN model fitting. L.J. and T.M. supervised the study. L.K., L.J., and T.M. 

designed the figures. L.K. and L.J. prepared the figures. L.K. and L.J. prepared the first 

draft of the manuscript. L.K., L.J., and T.M. prepared the manuscript. All authors dis -

cussed the results and commented on the manuscript.    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ17/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Competing interests 

T.M. is a co-founder of OptoGenTech GmbH. 

References 

1 Micera S, Caleo M, Chisari C, Hummel F C and Pedrocchi A 2020 Advanced 

Neurotechnologies for the Restoration of Motor Function  Neuron  105  604–20 

2 Kleinlogel S, Vogl C, Jeschke M, Neef J and Moser T 2020 Emerging Approaches for 

Restoration of Hearing and Vision  Physiol Rev  100  1467–525 

3 Zeng F G 2017 Challenges in Improving Cochlear Implant Performance and 

Accessibility  IEEE Trans Biomed Eng  64  1662–4 

4 Lenarz T 2017 Cochlear Implant – State of the Art  Laryngo-Rhino-Otol  96  S123–51 

5 Crowson M G, Semenov Y R, Tucci D L and Niparko J K 2017 Quality of Life and 

Cost-Effectiveness of Cochlear Implants: A Narrative Review  Audiology and 

Neurotology  22  236–58 

6 Fishman K E, Shannon R V and Slattery W H 1997 Speech Recognition as a Function 

of the Number of Electrodes Used in the SPEAK Cochlear Implant Speech Processor 

Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research  40  1201–15 

7 Friesen L M, Shannon R V, Baskent D and Wang X 2001 Speech recognition in noise as 

a function of the number of spectral channels: Comparison of acoustic hearing and 

cochlear implants  The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America  110  1150–63 

8 Garnham C, O’Driscoll M, Ramsden R and Saeed S 2002 Speech Understanding in 

Noise with a Med-El COMBI 40+ Cochlear Implant Using Reduced Channel Sets  Ear 

and Hearing  23  540–52 

9 Shannon R V, Cruz R J and Galvin J J 2011 Effect of Stimulation Rate on Cochlear 

Implant Users’ Phoneme, Word and Sentence Recognition in Quiet and in Noise 

Audiology and Neurotology  16  113–23 

10  Berg K A, Noble J H, Dawant B M, Dwyer R T, Labadie R F and Gifford R H 2020 

Speech recognition with cochlear implants as a function of the number of channels: 

Effects of electrode placement  The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America  147 

3646–56 

11  Prevoteau C, Chen S Y and Lalwani A K 2018 Music enjoyment with cochlear 

implantation  Auris Nasus Larynx  45  895–902 

12  Limb C J and Roy A T 2014 Technological, biological, and acoustical constraints to 

music perception in cochlear implant users  Hear. Res.  308  13–26 

13  Hunniford V, Kühler R, Wolf B, Keppeler D, Strenzke N and Moser T 2023 Patient 

perspectives on the need for improved hearing rehabilitation: A qualitative survey 

study of German cochlear implant users  Frontiers in Neuroscience  17 

14  Hernandez V H, Gehrt A, Reuter K, Jing Z, Jeschke M, Mendoza Schulz A, Hoch G, 

Bartels M, Vogt G, Garnham C W, Yawo H, Fukazawa Y, Augustine G J, Bamberg E,    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ18/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Kügler S, Salditt T, de Hoz L, Strenzke N and Moser T 2014 Optogenetic stimulation 

of the auditory pathway  J. Clin. Invest.  124  1114–29 

15  Khurana L, Keppeler D, Jablonski L and Moser T 2022 Model-based prediction of 

optogenetic sound encoding in the human cochlea by future optical cochlear implants 

Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal  20  3621–9 

16  Azees A A, Thompson A C, Thomas R, Zhou J, Ruther P, Wise A K, Ajay E A, 

Garrett D J, Quigley A, Fallon J B and Richardson R T 2023 Spread of activation and 

interaction between channels with multi-channel optogenetic stimulation in the mouse 

cochlea  Hearing Research  440  108911 

17  Dieter A, Duque-Afonso C J, Rankovic V, Jeschke M and Moser T 2019 Near 

physiological spectral selectivity of cochlear optogenetics  Nature Communications  10 

1962 

18  Dieter A, Klein E, Keppeler D, Jablonski L, Harczos T, Hoch G, Rankovic V, Paul O, 

Jeschke M, Ruther P and Moser T 2020 LED-based optical cochlear implants for μ

spectrally selective activation of the auditory nerve  EMBO Mol Med  e12387 

19  Bali B, Lopez de la Morena D, Mittring A, Mager T, Rankovic V, Huet A T and Moser 

T 2021 Utility of red-light ultrafast optogenetic stimulation of the auditory pathway 

EMBO Mol Med  13  e13391 

20  Mager T, Morena D L de la, Senn V, Schlotte J, D´Errico A, Feldbauer K, Wrobel C, 

Jung S, Bodensiek K, Rankovic V, Browne L, Huet A, Jüttner J, Wood P G, Letzkus J 

J, Moser T and Bamberg E 2018 High frequency neural spiking and auditory signaling 

by ultrafast red-shifted optogenetics  Nat Commun  9 1750 

21  Keppeler D, Merino R M, Morena D L de la, Bali B, Huet A T, Gehrt A, Wrobel C, 

Subramanian S, Dombrowski T, Wolf F, Rankovic V, Neef A and Moser T 2018 

Ultrafast optogenetic stimulation of the auditory pathway by targeting ‐optimized 

Chronos  The EMBO Journal  37  e99649 

22  Mittring A, Moser T and Huet A T 2023 Graded optogenetic activation of the auditory 

pathway for hearing restoration  Brain Stimul  16  466–83 

23  Hanekom T and Hanekom J J 2016 Three-dimensional models of cochlear implants: A 

review of their development and how they could support management and maintenance 

of cochlear implant performance  Network: Computation in Neural Systems  27  67–106 

24  Kalkman R K, Briaire J J and Frijns J H M 2016 Stimulation strategies and electrode 

design in computational models of the electrically stimulated cochlea: An overview of 

existing literature  Network: Computation in Neural Systems  27  107–34 

25  Takanen M, Bruce I C and Seeber B U 2016 Phenomenological modelling of electrically 

stimulated auditory nerve fibers: A review  Network  27  157–85 

26  Stadler S and Leijon A 2009 Prediction of Speech Recognition in Cochlear Implant 

Users by Adapting Auditory Models to Psychophysical Data  EURASIP J. Adv. Signal 

Process.  2009  175243 

27  Fredelake S and Hohmann V 2012 Factors affecting predicted speech intelligibility with    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ19/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

cochlear implants in an auditory model for electrical stimulation  Hearing Research  287 

76–90 

28  Brochier T, Schlittenlacher J, Roberts I, Goehring T, Jiang C, Vickers D and Bance M 

2022 From Microphone to Phoneme: An End-to-End Computational Neural Model for 

Predicting Speech Perception With Cochlear Implants  IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.  69 

3300–12 

29  Leclère T, Johannesen P T, Wijetillake A, Segovia-Martínez M and Lopez-Poveda E A 

2023 A computational modelling framework for assessing information transmission with 

cochlear implants  Hearing Research  432  108744 

30  Vandali A E, Whitford L A, Plant K L and Clark G M 2000 Speech perception as a 

function of electrical stimulation rate: using the Nucleus 24 cochlear implant system 

Ear Hear.  21  608–24 

31  Fromme U 2016  Investigation of voltage- and light-sensitive ion channels  (University of 

Göttingen) 

32  Tveito A and Lines G T 2016 A Simple Model of the Sodium Channel  Computing 

Characterizations of Drugs for Ion Channels and Receptors Using Markov Models 

Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering ed A Tveito and G T Lines 

(Cham: Springer International Publishing) pp 177–91 

33  Smith K E, Browne L, Selwood D L, McAlpine D and Jagger D J 2015 

Phosphoinositide Modulation of Heteromeric Kv1 Channels Adjusts Output of Spiral 

Ganglion Neurons from Hearing Mice  J. Neurosci.  35  11221–32 

34  Browne L, Smith K E and Jagger D J 2017 Identification of Persistent and Resurgent 

Sodium Currents in Spiral Ganglion Neurons Cultured from the Mouse Cochlea  eNeuro 

4 ENEURO.0303-17.2017 

35  Gerstner W, Kistler W M, Naud R and Paninski L 2014  Neuronal Dynamics: From 

Single Neurons to Networks and Models of Cognition  (Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press) 

36  Baytukalov T Audio recordings of words for your app or website 

37  Jürgens T, Hohmann V, Büchner A and Nogueira W 2018 The effects of electrical field 

spatial spread and some cognitive factors on speech-in-noise performance of individual 

cochlear implant users—A computer model study  PLOS ONE  13  e0193842 

38  Rutherford M A, Chapochnikov N M and Moser T 2012 Spike Encoding of 

Neurotransmitter Release Timing by Spiral Ganglion Neurons of the Cochlea  J. 

Neurosci.  32  4773–89 

39  Klapoetke N C, Murata Y, Kim S S, Pulver S R, Birdsey-Benson A, Cho Y K, 

Morimoto T K, Chuong A S, Carpenter E J, Tian Z, Wang J, Xie Y, Yan Z, Zhang Y, 

Chow B Y, Surek B, Melkonian M, Jayaraman V, Constantine-Paton M, Wong G K-S 

and Boyden E S 2014 Independent optical excitation of distinct neural populations  Nat 

Methods  11  338–46    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ20/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40  Hines A and Harte N 2010 Speech intelligibility from image processing  Speech 

Communication  52  736–52 

41  Hines A and Harte N 2012 Speech intelligibility prediction using a Neurogram 

Similarity Index Measure  Speech Communication  54  306–20 

42  Kandadai S, Hardin J and Creusere C D 2008 Audio quality assessment using the mean 

structural similarity measure  2008 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech 

and Signal Processing  2008 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and 

Signal Processing pp 221–4 

43  Gan C, Wang X, Zhu M and Yu X 2011 Audio quality evaluation using frequency 

structural similarity measure 299–303 

44  Fu Q-J and Shannon R V 2000 Effect of stimulation rate on phoneme recognition by 

Nucleus-22 cochlear implant listeners  J. Acoust. Soc. Am.  107  589 

45  Plant K, Holden L, Skinner M, Arcaroli J, Whitford L, Law M-A and Nel E 2007 

Clinical evaluation of higher stimulation rates in the nucleus research platform 8 system 

Ear Hear  28  381–93 

46  Arora K, Dawson P, Dowell R and Vandali A 2009 Electrical stimulation rate effects on 

speech perception in cochlear implants  International Journal of Audiology  48  561–7 

47  Miller C A, Abbas P J, Robinson B K, Nourski K V, Zhang F and Jeng F-C 2006 

Electrical excitation of the acoustically sensitive auditory nerve: single-fiber responses 

to electric pulse trains  J Assoc Res Otolaryngol  7 195–210 

48  Nicoletti M, Wirtz Chr and Hemmert W 2013 Modeling Sound Localization with 

Cochlear Implants  The Technology of Binaural Listening  Modern Acoustics and Signal 

Processing ed J Blauert (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer) pp 309–31 

49  Mangado N, Pons-Prats J, Coma M, Mistrík P, Piella G, Ceresa M and González 

Ballester M Á 2018 Computational Evaluation of Cochlear Implant Surgery Outcomes 

Accounting for Uncertainty and Parameter Variability  Frontiers in Physiology  9

50  Kunze K, Goßler C, Reinhardt M, Arnold M, Schwenzer F, Helke C, Reuter D, 

Keppeler D, Moser T and Schwarz U 2023 Multichannel Laser Diode to Polymer 

Waveguide Array Coupling with a Double-Aspheric Lens  Appl. Opt.  62  9353–60 

51  Littlefield P D and Richter C-P 2021 Near-infrared stimulation of the auditory nerve: A 

decade of progress toward an optical cochlear implant  Laryngoscope Investigative 

Otolaryngology  6 310–9 

52  Khurana L, Harczos T, Moser T and Jablonski L 2023 En route to sound coding 

strategies for optical cochlear implants  iScience  26  107725 

53  Jones M, Warren C, Mashal M, Greenham P and Wyss J 2023 Speech understanding in 

noise for cochlear implant recipients using a spatial noise reduction setting in an off the 

ear sound processor with directional microphones  Cochlear Implants International  24 

311–24 

54  Figueiredo J C, Abel S M and Papsin B C 2001 The Effect of the Audallion®    

> Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ21/26
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

BEAMformer Noise Reduction Preprocessor on Sound Localization for Cochlear 

Implant Users  Ear and Hearing  22  539 

55  Hersbach A 2014 Noise reduction for cochlear implants 

56  Fu Q-J and Nogaki G 2005 Noise Susceptibility of Cochlear Implant Users: The Role of 

Spectral Resolution and Smearing  J Assoc Res Otolaryngol  6 19–27 

57  Spoendlin H and Schrott A 1989 Analysis of the human auditory nerve  Hearing 

Research  43  25–38 

58  Liberman M C and Oliver M E 1984 Morphometry of intracellularly labeled neurons of 

the auditory nerve: Correlations with functional properties  J. Comp. Neurol.  223  163– 

76 

59  Moser T, Karagulyan N, Neef J and Jaime Tobón L M 2023 Diversity matters — 

extending sound intensity coding by inner hair cells via heterogeneous synapses  EMBO 

J 42  e114587 

60  Ruggero M A, Santi P A and Rich N C 1982 Type II cochlear ganglion cells in the 

chinchilla  Hearing Research  8 339–56 

61  Spoendlin H 1972 Innervation densities of the cochlea  Acta Otolaryngol.  73  235–48 

62  Tveito A, Lines G T, Edwards A G and McCulloch A 2016 Computing rates of Markov 

models of voltage-gated ion channels by inverting partial differential equations 

governing the probability density functions of the conducting and non-conducting states 

Math Biosci  277  126–35 

63  Schwarz J R and Eikhof G 1987 Na currents and action potentials in rat myelinated 

nerve fibres at 20 and 37° C  Pflugers Arch.  409  569–77 

64  Hille B 2001  Ion channels of excitable membranes  (Sunderland Massachusetts USA: 

Sinauer Associates) 

65  Negm M 2008  An Improved Stochastic Hodgkin-Huxley Based Model of a Node of 

Ranvier for Cochlear Implant Stimulation  Thesis 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 22/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Information 

Example output of sound coding strategy 

A comparison of the output of sound processing for electrical and optical stimulation is 

provided in  Supplementary Figure 1 .

Supplementary Figure  1. Comparison of electrical and optical sound coding in the framework.  (A)  A sound 

spectrogram with a logarithmic scale on the  y-axis, showcasing the frequency content of a “Happy Birthday” 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 23/26 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint instrumental tune.  (B)  Electrodogram for the above input with a total of 20 electrodes ( m) out of which a 

maximum of 10 were activated in a single frame ( n) with a pulse rate of 900  pps and 60  s long biphasic μ

pulses.  (C)  Emittogram using the same coding strategy but with a set of parameters for optical stimulation, 

namely,  n-of-m configuration of 32-of-64, 90  pps pulse rate, and 1-ms-long monophasic pulses. Overall, the 

figure provides a comparison of electrical and optical stimulation in encoding complex auditory stimuli, with 

a particular emphasis on the potentially enhanced spectral resolution offered by optogenetic cochlear im -

plants .

Channel models fitting 

The channel models are provided in  Supplementary Figure 2 .

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 24/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Figure  2. Markov chain models for each ion channel and the fit to the recorded electro -

physiological data . (A–D)  (i)  The ion channel models are based on the Markov chain models described by 

Tveito and Lines (2016) [ 32 ] and Tveito et al. (2016)  [62 ]. (ii)  Voltage clamp protocol (top) and average of 

recorded current traces (bottom).  (iii)  Correlation between average current traces and the channel model pre -

diction. The light green area shows the minimum and maximum values from all cross-validation batches com -

bined. The dark blue line shows the correlation for the currents estimated with the final model parameters. 

(iv)  Estimated channel currents using final parameters of the model (dashed lines) overlaid on the average of 

the recorded current traces (full, lighter colored lines) for the same protocols. 

Model parameterization 

The  rates involved in the model  presented in  Supplementary Figure 2  are defined by the 

equations described in Tveito and Lines (2016) [ 32 ]. 

The  Q10  factors, representing the rate of change in channel conductance with a 10°C in -

crease in temperature, and provide a means to calculate channel kinetics at temperatures 

different from the measured temperature.  As the recordings were conducted at room tem -

perature  (22–24°C) and we run the model for body temperature (37°C),  Q10  factors were 

used to multiply  the transition rates ( Supplementary Table 1 ). 

Supplementary Table  1. Q 10  factors of ion channels implemented in the neuron model .

Ion channel  Q 10  factor  Reference 

Voltage-gated sodium channels  3 63 

High-voltage activated potassium channels  3 63 

Low-voltage activated potassium channels  3 64 

Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channels  4.5  65 

Chronos  1.97 (on kinetics) 

2.92 (off kinetics) 

Personal 

communication with 

Dr. Andreas Neef 

(22 February 2023) 

Computation times 

For each block of the framework the computation time was calculated showing that the 

Hodgkin-Huxley neuron model impacts computation time the most ( Supplementary Figure 

3). 

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 25/26 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 19, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.737798 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Figure  3. Computation time for each block of the framework.  The CPU time was calculated 

for each block for all the n-of-m configurations of oCI simulations for all audio files. The pie chart shows me -

dian values of each block. The Hodgkin-Huxley neuron model utilized the maximum portion of time. The au -

dio files had an average length of 0.79  s and median length of 0.76  s. The computation times were found to 

be linearly correlated with the length of the input audio (not shown) .

Khurana et al . [REV:2025.01.02] bioR iv | χ 26/26