Title: Neural Learning as a Game Induced by Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.21131v1

Published Time: Mon, 21 Sep 2026 00:18:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Neural Learning as a Game Induced by Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity 

Xinhao Fan 1, ∗ and Shreesh P. Mysore 2, 1, 3, †

> 1

The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. 

> 2

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. 

> 3

Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. 

(Dated: September 21, 2026) A general framework for inferring the computational role of spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) does not currently exist. Here, we develop a game-theoretic description for a canonical, convergent neural circuit with general STDP and postsynaptic-potential (PSP) kernels. Parity-matched STDP–PSP interactions induce a potential game among presynaptic neurons, whereas parity-mismatched interactions induce a zero-sum game. These components, respectively, implement contrastive PCA and flow selection; their weighted interplay determines learning dynamics and computation for arbitrary STDP rules. 

A central problem in biological learning is understand-ing how local plasticity rules collectively give rise to global computation. Among the various plasticity mech-anisms discovered over the past several decades, spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) is one of the most extensively studied and experimentally validated [1, 2]. It has been implicated in a wide range of learning-related functions in neural systems [3–7], and experiments have revealed diverse forms of STDP. However, no general the-oretical framework exists, to our knowledge, to formally characterize the computations implemented by the myr-iad forms of this foundational plasticity rule. Theoretical studies of STDP have addressed computa-tional implications in specific learning scenarios. One line of research considers particular families of STDP rules and circuit architectures, and investigates the computa-tions that they can implement, such as sequence predic-tion [8], Bayesian inference [9, 10], and input selectivity [11–16]. Another begins with a prescribed normative ob-jective and derives STDP-like learning rules capable of optimizing it, such as for maximizing mutual informa-tion [17, 18], timing sensitivity [19], cumulative reward [20] or minimizing firing entropy [21]. Yet, a means to infer the computational role of an arbitrary STDP rule remains lacking. Here, we develop a general theoretical framework for STDP by drawing upon the structures of game theory. We do so motivated by experimental studies of synaptic plasticity, which associated STDP with both coopera-tive and competitive interactions. Cooperation can arise when the coordinated activity of multiple inputs jointly shapes plasticity to achieve a collective function [22–26]. Conversely, the strengthening of some inputs can com-petitively suppress or weaken others [27–30]. Together, these observations suggest that cooperation and compe-  

> ∗Contact author: xfan20@jhu.edu
> †Contact author: mysore@jhu.edu

tition provide a fundamental organizing perspective on collective synaptic learning, making game theory a nat-ural source of inspiration. Specifically, here, we study learning under general STDP rules in a canonical n-to-1 neural circuit. We show that STDP induces an explicit game among synap-tic connections. Notably, the interaction between the STDP kernel and the postsynaptic potential (PSP) obeys a parity-selection rule: parity-matched STDP–PSP com-ponents generate cooperative interactions described by a potential game, whereas parity-mismatched components generate competitive interactions described by a zero-sum game. These two game components are independent, and play distinct computational roles. By establishing an exact mathematical equivalence between synaptic learn-ing and a game, our framework explains how local STDP rules can collectively generate global computation. 

Game dynamics —In game theory, a game is spec-ified by three basic elements: a set of players, indexed by subscripts i ∈ { 1, 2, ...n }; their strategies, represented here by the vector s := ( s1, s 2, . . . , s n)T ; and their pay-off functions u := ( u1(s), u 2(s), . . . , u n(s)) T . In playing the game, each player i selects a strategy si to maximize their own payoff ui; for example, a bidder may choose a bid that maximizes their expected profit. Despite the diversity of strategic scenarios, different games often share common underlying structures. In par-ticular, all finite games admit a canonical decomposition into three components that capture aligned incentives, conflicting incentives, and incentives that are unaffected by unilateral strategic changes [31]. Motivated by this three-way interpretation, for natural systems that evolve continuously, we consider a differen-tiable game G composed of a common-interest potential component GP , a zero-sum interaction component GZS ,and a nonstrategic component GN . Specifically, 

G := GP + GZS + GN , (1) where the payoff vector u is correspondingly decomposed arXiv:2609.21131v1 [physics.bio-ph] 17 Sep 2026 2into three payoff components, 

u = uP + uZS + uN . (2) Each component is characterized by a distinct strategic property. In the potential game, there exists a global game po-tential over all players’ strategies, V (s), such that the change in any player’s payoff induced by a unilateral strategy change matches the corresponding change in the potential, i.e. ∂u Pi (s)/∂s i = ∂V (s)/∂s i, ∀i. Thus, players in a potential game can be viewed as effectively cooperating to increase a common game potential, even though each acts in their own self-interest. Intuitively, individually self-interested behavior can still contribute to the collective welfare. By contrast, zero-sum games describe competitive interactions in which gains to some players necessarily come at the expense of others, with P 

> i

uZS i (s) = 0 , ∀s. Such games generally do not admit a common potential that aligns the players’ incentives. Finally, in a nonstrategic game, the payoff of each player depends only on the strategies of the other players rather than on their own strategy, with ∂u Ni (s)/∂s i = 0 , ∀i, and therefore acts as a background component of the game. Game dynamics describes how the players’ strategies evolve over time. When players adopt gradient-play dy-namics, updating their strategies according to the gradi-ents of their own payoffs, the resulting game dynamics becomes ˙s ∝ ∇ s ⊙ uP + ∇s ⊙ uZS + ∇s ⊙ uN . (3) where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. Combining this expression with the defining properties of the three components gives 

∇s ⊙ uP = ∇sV (s), (4) 

∇s ⊙ uZS = ( ∂s1 uZS  

> 1

, ∂ s2 uZS  

> 2

, . . . , ∂ sn uZS n )T , (5) 

∇s ⊙ uN = 0 . (6) 

Neural learning dynamics —At the neuroscientific level, we consider a minimal convergent circuit com-prised of generalized linear spiking neurons, with a sin-gle postsynaptic neuron receiving input from n presy-naptic neurons. The ith input spike train is written as 

xi(t) = P 

> k

δ(t − tki ), and the output spike train of the postsynaptic neuron is y(t) = P 

> k

δ(t − tky ), with δ de-noting the Dirac delta function. As is common in the field, we assume that the input spike trains are jointly wide-sense stationary [32]. The postsynaptic potential elicited by the ith input is the convolved signal zi(t) = ( h ∗ xi)( t) = P 

> k

h(t − tki ),

where h is the PSP kernel. The total effect on postsy-naptic neuron’s potential is modeled as a weighted sum of these convolved inputs, q(t) = P 

> i

wizi(t), where wi is the signed synaptic weight of the ith input. The instan-taneous firing rate is then given by a nonlinear function 

λ(t) = ϕ(q(t)), from which the output spike train y is generated. STDP specifies the change in synaptic connectivity associated with a pair of presynaptic and postsynaptic spikes through a kernel K(τ ), where τ = tpost − tpre is the postsynaptic spike time relative to the presynaptic spike time, and R K(τ )dτ = 0. Accounting for all rele-vant spike pairs gives ˙wi(t) = 

Z ∞−∞ 

K(τ )y(t)xi(t − τ )dτ (7) The resulting synaptic dynamics reflects both the fixed properties of the underlying system and fluctuations aris-ing from individual realizations of the spike trains xi and 

y. Here, we focus on regimes in which the fixed compo-nent dominates the evolution and characterize it through the ensemble-averaged dynamics. Specifically, we con-sider an ensemble of systems with identical setup and initialization that differ only in their realizations of the spike trains. Let ⟨·⟩ denote the ensemble average. Applying the ap-proximation ⟨xi(t)y(t + τ )⟩ ≈ ⟨ xi(t)λ(t + τ )⟩ and retain-ing only the first-order term in the Taylor expansion of 

λ around the reference potential ⟨q(t)⟩, we obtain the dynamics governing the evolution of the weight vector 

w = ( w1, w 2, ....w n)T :˙w = ϕ′(⟨q⟩)Aw, (8) with 

Aij := 

Z ∞−∞ 

κ(τ ) Cxi,x j (τ )dτ, (9) 

κ(τ ) := 

Z ∞−∞ 

K(ρ)h(ρ − τ )dρ = ( K ∗ h∨)( τ ). (10) The dynamical matrix A is determined jointly by the STDP-PSP interaction kernel κ and the input-spike cross-correlation Cxi,x j (τ ) := ⟨xi(t)xj (t + τ )⟩. Since both are fixed, A remains constant during throughout the evolution. The superscript ∨ denotes time reversal, such that h∨(t) = h(−t). Decomposing the STDP and PSP kernels into even and odd parts yields a unique decomposition of their interac-tion kernel κ. The parity-matched terms contribute to 

κeven , whereas the parity-mismatched terms contribute to κodd :

κ(τ ) = κeven (τ ) + κodd (τ ), (11) 

κeven := Keven ∗ h∨ 

> even

+ Kodd ∗ h∨

> odd

, (12) 

κodd := Keven ∗ h∨ 

> odd

+ Kodd ∗ h∨

> even

. (13) This, in turn, yields a parity-based decomposition of the dynamical matrix: 

A = Aeven + Aodd , (14) 3with 

Aeven ,ij := 

Z ∞−∞ 

κeven (τ ) Cxi,x j (τ )dτ, (15) 

Aodd ,ij := 

Z ∞−∞ 

κodd (τ ) Cxi,x j (τ )dτ, (16) from eqs.(9, 12, and 13). By construction, Aeven is symmetric, whereas Aodd is antisymmetric. Consequently, they correspond to the gradient and solenoidal components, respectively, of a Helmholtz decomposition of Aw . (See Supplementary Material for the full derivation). 

Equivalence between game dynamics and neu-ral learning —The above allows for the establishment of a direct correspondence between neural learning and the differentiable game constructed above. Specifically, learning in the canonical convergent circuit can be rein-terpreted as a game (Fig. 1) in which each player i, corre-sponding to a presynaptic neuron, adjusts their strategy 

wi, the synaptic strength, to maximize their payoff ui,which encodes the computational role of that synapse. The payoff structure of this game incorporates both coop-eration and competition, corresponding to different com-ponents of the STDP–PSP interaction. Under this interpretation, the neural learning dynam-ics in Eq. (8) is equivalent to the strategy evolution of the differentiable game in Eq. (3). Specifically, we obtain the following term-by-term correspondence: ˙w ∝ Aeven w + Aodd w ←→ ˙s ∝ ∇ sV + ∇s ⊙ uZS . (17) under the mapping 

si = wi (18) 

uPi = V = 12 wT Aeven w, (19) 

uZS i = wi

X

> j

Aodd ,ij wj , X

> i

uZS i = 0 , (20) 

uNi = ci.

where ci is a constant independent of w.This correspondence yields that the parity-matched part of the STDP–PSP interaction defines the potential-game component and thereby, the cooperation among presynaptic players. Similarly, the parity-mismatched part defines the zero-sum component and thereby, the competition among players. The nonstrategic compo-nent captures weight-independent payoff offsets and acts as a constant background term in neural learning. With this correspondence in place, we next investigate the computational roles encoded by the game payoff func-tions. Specifically, we ask: what do the neurons cooper-ate to achieve, and what do they compete for? We answer these questions by examining the two game components separately, identifying the distinct computations they im-plement, and then combining them to develop a unified interpretation of STDP learning.  

> FIG. 1. Illustration showing the proposed equivalence be-tween game and synaptic learning in neural circuit.

Computation by the potential-game compo-nent —To reveal its computational objective, we rewrite 

V defined in Eq. (19) in a more interpretable form, by ex-ploiting the spectral properties of κeven (t). We show that 

V is the difference between the variances of two induced distributions obtained by applying specific synaptic fil-ters to the input spike train: namely, filters derived from the parity matched STDP-PSP interaction. The parity-matched STDP-PSP interaction kernel 

κeven (τ ) is even, and consequently, its Fourier transform, 

bκeven (ξ), is real. Its positive and negative spectral parts, in turn, uniquely define two real filters, g+(τ ) and g−(τ ), respectively: 

cg+(ξ) = pmax(0 , bκeven (ξ)) , (21) 

cg−(ξ) = pmax(0 , −bκeven (ξ)) . (22) These filters can be used to express the potential V = 

> 12

wT Aeven w as the difference between two variances: 

V (w) = 12

 Var[ wT (g+ ∗ x)] − Var[ wT (g− ∗ x)]  , (23) where x(t) = ( x1(t), . . . , x n(t)) T is the vector of inputs and g ∗ x = ( g ∗ x1, . . . , g ∗ xn) denotes the vector of con-volved inputs. Here Var[ ·] := 

D

(· − ⟨·⟩ )2E

denotes signal variance (See Supplementary Material for the full deriva-tion). From eq.(23), it becomes clear that, in general, potential-maximizing game dynamics are inherently un-stable: if there exists a direction along which the variance of g+ ∗ x exceeds that of g− ∗ x, the potential is positive and drives w to diverge. Otherwise, if no such direc-tion exists, the variance difference is nonpositive and w

shrinks toward the zero vector, apart from possible neu-tral directions for which the difference vanishes. This in-stability accords with previous observations that STDP can drive synaptic weights collectively toward saturation or collapse [33, 34], rather than segregating them into a bimodal distribution of competing strong and weak sub-sets. However, when w is constrained to have a constant norm, as happens in biological neural networks through 4mechanisms such as homeostatic plasticity [35, 36], the potential maximization becomes equivalent to finding the direction along which the projected variances of the two induced distributions contrast most strongly. This cor-responds precisely to the established algorithm of con-trastive PCA , whose goal is to extract informative sig-nal from a target distribution that differs from a back-ground distribution, for example, disease-related protein-expression variation against variation in healthy controls [37]. Here, the neural circuit defines the target and back-ground distributions as two distinct n-dimensional dis-tributions obtained by applying the filters g+ and g− to the input spike data. A special case occurs when bκeven (ξ) = 1 almost every-where. Then g+ reduces to the Dirac delta function and 

g− becomes zero, yielding ordinary PCA: 

V (w) = 12 Var[ wT x]. (24) 

Computation by the zero-sum component —This component is characterized by the payoff vector uZS ,whose i-th entry, uZS i , represents the individual payoff of player i in competition. As shown in Eq. (20), this pay-off function is governed by the parity-mismatched STDP-PSP interaction. After transforming to the frequency domain, the payoff can be re-expressed as a weighted integral of Im[ bCwixi,v (ξ)], the imaginary part of the cross-spectrum between the synaptic contribution wixi and the postsy-naptic drive v := P 

> j

wj xj :

uZS i = 1

π

Z ∞

> 0

Im[ bκodd (ξ)] Im[ bCwixi,v (ξ)] dξ. (25) (See Supplemental Material for the derivation). The cross-spectrum bCwixi,v (ξ) is complex-valued and encodes both the strength and phase lag of co-fluctuations between the contribution from one presy-naptic neuron and the summed contribution of all neu-rons at frequency ξ. Its imaginary part, Im[ bCwixi,v (ξ)], isolates lagged synchronization from the in-phase com-ponent captured by the real part, a property com-monly exploited by measures such as imaginary coher-ence (ImCoh) to characterize signal flow [38]. The mag-nitude of Im[ bCwixi,v (ξ)], therefore, reflects the strength of lagged coactivity between the presynaptic contribution and postsynaptic drive, while its sign indicates which sig-nal leads in time. The frequency domain kernel bκodd (ξ) therefore imposes a preference criterion induced by the STDP–PSP inter-action. Its sign across frequencies determines the pre-ferred direction of signal flow, whereas its magnitude de-termines the frequency bands that matter. Maximizing the payoff thus corresponds to strengthening synapses that promote directed signal flow within specified fre-quency ranges.      

> FIG. 2. (a)–(b) Parity-matched simulations: (a) synaptic-weight dynamics (blue) and (b) corresponding potential dy-namics (red). (c)–(d) Parity-mismatched simulations: (c) synaptic-weight dynamics (blue) and (d) payoff dynamics of the two players (red and orange). In all panels, individual trajectories are shown in light colors, their ensemble mean in darker colors, and theoretical predictions in black.

Furthermore, the antagonistic nature of the zero-sum game implies that, as one presynaptic player improves its alignment with the favored signal flow, this gain comes at the expense of the other players. This competition arises because the postsynaptic drive v depends on all inputs: an adjustment to a particular weight wi can shift the phase of v, thereby altering its lagged synchronization with the other inputs. Our framework captures this com-petitive redistribution of connectivity through the zero-sum game structure. 

Parity-matched simulations —To validate our the-oretical prediction that parity-matched and parity-mismatched STDP–PSP interactions give rise to potential-game and zero-sum dynamics, respectively, we simulate an ensemble of 2-to-1 SNNs, for which the two-dimensional weight vector ( w1, w 2) can be directly visu-alized. We first consider the parity-matched case, where both the STDP and PSP kernels are chosen to be even functions, with 

Ksim  

> e

(τ ) = η



1 − τ 2

σ2



e− τ 22σ2 , (26) 

hsim  

> e

(τ ) = e− τ 22σ2 . (27) The parameter η is a plasticity scaling factor that con-trols the learning rate, while σ sets the temporal width of the kernels. The input spike trains are chosen as two time-shifted copies of the same Poisson spike train with firing rate r, separately by a delay of σ. Their correlation 5functions are: 

C sim  

> x1,x 1

(τ ) = C sim  

> x2,x 2

(τ ) = r2 + rδ (τ ), (28) 

C sim  

> x1,x 2

(τ ) = r2 + rδ (τ − σ), (29) 

C sim  

> x2,x 1

(τ ) = r2 + rδ (τ + σ). (30) (See Supplemental Material for details of the simulation setup.) Both the ensemble-averaged weight trajectories (Fig. 2(a)) and the increase in game potential (Fig. 2(b)) agree with the theoretical predictions. 

Parity-mismatched simulations —To validate the prediction that this component generates zero-sum game dynamics, we simulated the same circuit structure with the same input statistics as in the potential-game case. The only change was to replace the STDP kernel with an odd function, leaving only the parity-mismatched com-ponent: 

Ksim  

> o

(τ ) = η

√52

τσ e− τ 22σ2 . (31) The ensemble-averaged weight dynamics exhibit cyclic competitive behavior (Fig. 2(c)), while the payoffs of the two presynaptic players are anticorrelated over time (Fig.2(d)). Both observations agree with the theoretical predictions (See Supplemental Material for details of the simulation setup). We note that, although the simulation displays a closed cycle, such cyclic competition would be interrupted in a biological circuit by sign constraints arising from Dale’s principle [39]. An excitatory output cannot become in-hibitory, so the trajectory eventually encounters a hard boundary rather than completing the cycle. In game-theoretic terms, this boundary corresponds to a decisive victory for one player and the elimination of a bankrupt opponent. 

Mixed-parity simulations —Finally, we simulate the general case in which both the STDP and PSP kernels contain even and odd components. The resulting neu-ral learning dynamics combines a cooperative potential-game component with a competitive zero-sum compo-nent. We use the same circuit setup and input statistics as before, but parameterize the STDP and PSP kernels by ( α, β ) (Fig. 3(a)), which control the relative contri-butions of their even and odd components: 

Ksim  

> α

(τ ) = cos α K sim  

> e

(τ ) + sin α K sim  

> o

(τ ), (32) 

hsim  

> β

(τ ) = cos β h sim  

> e

(τ ) + sin β h sim  

> o

(τ ), (33) where Ksim  

> e

, K sim  

> o

, h sim  

> e

are defined in the previous simu-lations, and 

hsim  

> o

(τ ) = 2

√5

τσ e− τ 22σ2 . (34) Under this setup, the parity-matched and parity-mismatched components of the dynamical matrix are 01                       

> K sim
> α /η
> (a)
> α= 0 α=π/ 2
> 100 0100
> τ(ms)
> 01
> h sim
> β
> β= 0 β=π/ 2
> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> Rpred
> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> R sim
> CCC = 0 .991 RMSE = 0 .048
> (b)
> 012ππ32π2π
> α
> 0
> 12ππ
> 32π
> 2π
> β
> (c)

R pred       

> 012ππ32π2π
> α

R sim 

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

FIG. 3. Simulation results for the mixed-parity scenario. (a) Even and odd components of the normalized STDP and PSP kernels. (b) Simulated versus theoretical competition ratios across the ( α, β ) parameter space. Agreement is quantified by Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) and root-mean-square error (RMSE). (c) Corresponding heatmaps of the theoretical and simulated competition ratios. 

(See Supplemental Material for the derivation) 

Apred even = η 14 r√πσ cos( α − β)

 2 e−1/4

e−1/4 2



, (35) and 

Apred odd = η

√54 r√πσe −1/4 sin( α − β)

 0 1

−1 0 



. (36) These two components represent the cooperative and competitive contributions to the learning dynamics. Their relative magnitudes determine whether learning is cooperation-dominated or competition-dominated. We therefore define the ratio of competition from their Frobe-nius norms: 

R(α, β ) := ∥Aodd (α, β )∥2

> F

∥Aeven (α, β )∥2 

> F

+ ∥Aodd (α, β )∥2

> F

. (37) This yields the following analytical prediction as a function of ( α, β ): 

Rpred (α, β ) = 5 sin 2(α − β)(1 + 4 e1/2) cos 2(α − β) + 5 sin 2(α − β) .

(38) We simulate ensembles of SNNs across a range of pa-rameter pairs ( α, β ). The measured ratio of competition 

closely matches the theoretical prediction (Figs. 3(b) and 3(c)), with Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient of 6Parity-matched STDP-PSP interaction Potential game Parity-mismatched STDP-PSP interaction Weight-independent factors Zero-sum game Non-strategic game Contrastive PCA Frequency-selective signal flow 

> FIG. 4. Summary of the theoretical framework.

0.991 (See Supplemental Material for details of the sim-ulation setup). 

Discussion —In this work, we introduced a frame-work that establishes a mathematical equivalence be-tween learning dynamics in a spiking neural network and strategy evolution in a game (Fig. 4). In a manner reminiscent of Minsky’s “Society of Mind” [40], learning emerges from interactions among presynaptic synapses viewed as individual players. The parity decomposition reveals that these interactions contain both potential-game and zero-sum components (Fig. 4). The potential-game component supports objective-driven computation through cooperative synaptic interactions, giving rise to contrastive principal component analysis. The zero-sum component instead produces competition over the strength of directed signal transmission within specific frequency bands. These two components coexist, allow-ing the same learning system to perform cooperative and competitive computations simultaneously. Whereas previous works have utilized some elements similar to those in our approach, such as STDP–PSP convolution or symmetric–antisymmetric decomposition [41, 42], they have provided only partial explanations of the underlying computations by showing that neural learning resembles slow-feature analysis (SFA) or PCA in more restrictive cases. Our work extends these past lines of research by providing a game-theoretic math-ematical formalization that applies to a much broader range of STDP and PSP kernels and unravels the precise algorithmic computation implemented by neural learn-ing. Moreover, by viewing the mixture of different com-ponents as an integrated system, our framework reveals how both the computational role and the learning dy-namics are systematically shaped by the parity structure of the STDP–PSP interaction. From the perspective of game theory, the general evo-lution of a game need not maximize the collective welfare of its participants [43–45], motivating principles such as incentive alignment [46, 47] in the theory of mechanism design for economic and social systems. From this view-point, biological processes including homeostatic plastic-ity [48], neuromodulation [49], and metaplasticity [50] may be interpreted as mechanisms that align local learn-ing incentives in ways that support global computation. This interpretation suggests that tools from game the-ory may be useful for analyzing how biological systems coordinate local plasticity rules to achieve system-level computational functions. Our framework also suggests a possible mechanism for representational drift [51, 52], whereby the tuning of in-dividual neurons changes over time while task-relevant information remains stably encoded at the population level, supporting consistent behavior. The cooperative game component drives the system toward stable solu-tions in the potential landscape, allowing the population-level computation to converge. In contrast, the com-petitive zero-sum component can sustain non-convergent dynamics, as individual players continually adapt in re-sponse to one another. The coexistence of these two components therefore provides a natural separation be-tween computational stability and representational sta-bility: the population-level computation may remain sta-ble while individual synaptic weights, and consequently neuronal tuning, continue to evolve. This predicts that representational drift may arise intrinsically from parity-mismatched STDP–PSP interactions, rather than solely from noise or learning from new experiences. Finally, our results demonstrate that both the com-putational regime and the qualitative learning dynamics can be controlled simply by altering the temporal struc-ture of the STDP and PSP kernels, as established an-alytically and further illustrated by progressively vary-ing these kernels in simulations. This direct link be-tween temporal kernel structure and emergent computa-tion may help explain how diverse plasticity rules across cortical and subcortical structures support distinct com-putational functions [53–55], while also providing a prin-cipled basis for designing STDP rules that implement de-sired computations and dynamical regimes. Beyond in-dividual plasticity rules, our results point to contrastive PCA as a promising computational primitive for building larger artificial neural systems with stable population-level computation. Architectures composed of such mod-ules, rather than conventional perceptron-like units, may offer a biologically grounded, unsupervised alternative for constructing multilayer artificial neural systems.           

> [1] Y. Dan and M.-m. Poo, Spike timing-dependent plastic-ity of neural circuits, Neuron 44 , 23 (2004). [2] N. Caporale and Y. Dan, Spike timing–dependent plas-ticity: a hebbian learning rule, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31 ,25 (2008). [3] D. E. Feldman, Timing-based ltp and ltd at vertical in-puts to layer ii/iii pyramidal cells in rat barrel cortex, Neuron 27 , 45 (2000). [4] T. Tzounopoulos, Y. Kim, D. Oertel, and L. O. Trussell, Cell-specific, spike timing–dependent plasticities in the dorsal cochlear nucleus, Nature neuroscience 7,719 (2004). [5] R.-M. Shin, E. Tsvetkov, and V. Y. Bolshakov, Spa-

7

tiotemporal asymmetry of associative synaptic plasticity in fear conditioning pathways, Neuron 52 , 883 (2006). [6] V. Pawlak and J. N. Kerr, Dopamine receptor activa-tion is required for corticostriatal spike-timing-dependent plasticity, Journal of Neuroscience 28 , 2435 (2008). [7] M. Sgritta, F. Locatelli, T. Soda, F. Prestori, and E. U. D’Angelo, Hebbian spike-timing dependent plasticity at the cerebellar input stage, Journal of Neuroscience 37 ,2809 (2017). [8] L. F. Abbott and K. I. Blum, Functional significance of long-term potentiation for sequence learning and predic-tion, Cerebral cortex 6, 406 (1996). [9] B. Nessler, M. Pfeiffer, and W. Maass, Stdp enables spiking neurons to detect hidden causes of their inputs, Advances in neural information processing systems 22 

(2009). [10] B. Nessler, M. Pfeiffer, L. Buesing, and W. Maass, Bayesian computation emerges in generic cortical micro-circuits through spike-timing-dependent plasticity, PLoS computational biology 9, e1003037 (2013). [11] R. G¨ utig, R. Aharonov, S. Rotter, and H. Sompolinsky, Learning input correlations through nonlinear temporally asymmetric hebbian plasticity, Journal of Neuroscience 

23 , 3697 (2003). [12] A. N. Burkitt, H. Meffin, and D. B. Grayden, Spike-timing-dependent plasticity: the relationship to rate-based learning for models with weight dynamics deter-mined by a stable fixed point, Neural computation 16 ,885 (2004). [13] H. Meffin, J. Besson, A. Burkitt, and D. Grayden, Learn-ing the structure of correlated synaptic subgroups using stable and competitive spike-timing-dependent plasticity, Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Mat-ter Physics 73 , 041911 (2006). [14] M. Gilson, A. N. Burkitt, D. B. Grayden, D. A. Thomas, and J. L. Van Hemmen, Emergence of network struc-ture due to spike-timing-dependent plasticity in recurrent neuronal networks. i. input selectivity–strengthening cor-related input pathways, Biological cybernetics 101 , 81 (2009). [15] R. R. Kerr, A. N. Burkitt, D. A. Thomas, M. Gilson, and D. B. Grayden, Delay selection by spike-timing-dependent plasticity in recurrent networks of spiking neu-rons receiving oscillatory inputs, PLoS computational bi-ology 9, e1002897 (2013). [16] Y. Luz and M. Shamir, Oscillations via spike-timing de-pendent plasticity in a feed-forward model, PLoS com-putational biology 12 , e1004878 (2016). [17] G. Chechik, Spike-timing-dependent plasticity and rele-vant mutual information maximization, Neural computa-tion 15 , 1481 (2003). [18] T. Toyoizumi, J.-P. Pfister, K. Aihara, and W. Ger-stner, Optimality model of unsupervised spike-timing-dependent plasticity: synaptic memory and weight dis-tribution, Neural computation 19 , 639 (2007). [19] A. Bell and L. Parra, Maximising sensitivity in a spik-ing network, Advances in neural information processing systems 17 (2004). [20] R. P. Rao and T. J. Sejnowski, Spike-timing-dependent hebbian plasticity as temporal difference learning, Neural computation 13 , 2221 (2001). [21] S. Bohte and M. C. Mozer, Reducing spike train variabil-ity: A computational theory of spike-timing dependent plasticity, Advances in neural information processing sys-tems 17 (2004). [22] P. J. Sj¨ ostr¨ om, G. G. Turrigiano, and S. B. Nelson, Rate, timing, and cooperativity jointly determine cor-tical synaptic plasticity, Neuron 32 , 1149 (2001). [23] S. Tazerart, D. E. Mitchell, S. Miranda-Rottmann, and R. Araya, A spike-timing-dependent plasticity rule for dendritic spines, Nature communications 11 , 4276 (2020). [24] G.-q. Bi and M.-m. Poo, Distributed synaptic modifica-tion in neural networks induced by patterned stimulation, Nature 401 , 792 (1999). [25] S. Cassenaer and G. Laurent, Hebbian stdp in mushroom bodies facilitates the synchronous flow of olfactory infor-mation in locusts, Nature 448 , 709 (2007). [26] R. K. Mishra, S. Kim, S. J. Guzman, and P. Jonas, Symmetric spike timing-dependent plasticity at ca3–ca3 synapses optimizes storage and recall in autoassociative networks, Nature communications 7, 11552 (2016). [27] Y.-J. Lo and M.-m. Poo, Activity-dependent synaptic competition in vitro: heterosynaptic suppression of de-veloping synapses, Science 254 , 1019 (1991). [28] L. I. Zhang, H. W. Tao, C. E. Holt, W. A. Harris, and M.-m. Poo, A critical window for cooperation and com-petition among developing retinotectal synapses, Nature 

395 , 37 (1998). [29] S. Sajikumar, R. G. Morris, and M. Korte, Competition between recently potentiated synaptic inputs reveals a winner-take-all phase of synaptic tagging and capture, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 ,12217 (2014). [30] S. El-Boustani, J. P. Ip, V. Breton-Provencher, G. W. Knott, H. Okuno, H. Bito, and M. Sur, Locally coordi-nated synaptic plasticity of visual cortex neurons in vivo, Science 360 , 1349 (2018). [31] O. Candogan, I. Menache, A. Ozdaglar, and P. A. Parrilo, Flows and decompositions of games: Harmonic and po-tential games, Mathematics of Operations Research 36 ,474 (2011). [32] A. Morrison, M. Diesmann, and W. Gerstner, Phe-nomenological models of synaptic plasticity based on spike timing, Biological cybernetics 98 , 459 (2008). [33] J.-Y. Chen, P. Lonjers, C. Lee, M. Chistiakova, M. Vol-gushev, and M. Bazhenov, Heterosynaptic plasticity pre-vents runaway synaptic dynamics, Journal of Neuro-science 33 , 15915 (2013). [34] M. Volgushev, J.-Y. Chen, V. Ilin, R. Goz, M. Chis-tiakova, and M. Bazhenov, Partial breakdown of input specificity of stdp at individual synapses promotes new learning, Journal of Neuroscience 36 , 8842 (2016). [35] G. G. Turrigiano, K. R. Leslie, N. S. Desai, L. C. Ruther-ford, and S. B. Nelson, Activity-dependent scaling of quantal amplitude in neocortical neurons, Nature 391 ,892 (1998). [36] S. Royer and D. Par´ e, Conservation of total synaptic weight through balanced synaptic depression and poten-tiation, Nature 422 , 518 (2003). [37] A. Abid, M. J. Zhang, V. K. Bagaria, and J. Zou, Ex-ploring patterns enriched in a dataset with contrastive principal component analysis, Nature communications 9,2134 (2018). [38] G. Nolte, O. Bai, L. Wheaton, Z. Mari, S. Vorbach, and M. Hallett, Identifying true brain interaction from eeg data using the imaginary part of coherency, Clinical neu-rophysiology 115 , 2292 (2004). 8

[39] J. C. Eccles, P. Fatt, and K. Koketsu, Cholinergic and inhibitory synapses in a pathway from motor-axon col-laterals to motoneurones, The Journal of physiology 126 ,524 (1954). [40] M. Minsky, Society of mind (Simon and Schuster, 1986). [41] M. Gilson, T. Fukai, and A. N. Burkitt, Spectral analysis of input spike trains by spike-timing-dependent plasticity, PLoS computational biology 8, e1002584 (2012). [42] H. Sprekeler, C. Michaelis, and L. Wiskott, Slowness: An objective for spike-timing–dependent plasticity?, PLoS Computational Biology 3, e112 (2007). [43] T. Roughgarden and ´E. Tardos, How bad is selfish rout-ing?, Journal of the ACM (JACM) 49 , 236 (2002). [44] A. J. Stewart and J. B. Plotkin, Collapse of cooperation in evolving games, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 17558 (2014). [45] E. Mazumdar, L. J. Ratliff, and S. S. Sastry, On gradient-based learning in continuous games, SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science 2, 103 (2020). [46] E. S. Maskin, Mechanism design: How to implement so-cial goals, American Economic Review 98 , 567 (2008). [47] D. Balduzzi, S. Racaniere, J. Martens, J. Foerster, K. Tuyls, and T. Graepel, The mechanics of n-player differentiable games, in International Conference on Ma-chine Learning (PMLR, 2018) pp. 354–363. [48] G. G. Turrigiano and S. B. Nelson, Homeostatic plas-ticity in the developing nervous system, Nature reviews neuroscience 5, 97 (2004). [49] F. Nadim and D. Bucher, Neuromodulation of neurons and synapses, Current opinion in neurobiology 29 , 48 (2014). [50] W. C. Abraham, Metaplasticity: tuning synapses and networks for plasticity, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9,387 (2008). [51] M. E. Rule, T. O’Leary, and C. D. Harvey, Causes and consequences of representational drift, Current opinion in neurobiology 58 , 141 (2019). [52] L. N. Driscoll, L. Duncker, and C. D. Harvey, Represen-tational drift: Emerging theories for continual learning and experimental future directions, Current opinion in neurobiology 76 , 102609 (2022). [53] G.-q. Bi and M.-m. Poo, Synaptic modifications in cul-tured hippocampal neurons: dependence on spike timing, synaptic strength, and postsynaptic cell type, The Jour-nal of neuroscience 18 , 10464 (1998). [54] J.-t. Lu, C.-y. Li, J.-P. Zhao, M.-m. Poo, and X.-h. Zhang, Spike-timing-dependent plasticity of neocortical excitatory synapses on inhibitory interneurons depends on target cell type, The Journal of Neuroscience 27 , 9711 (2007). [55] E. Fino, V. Paille, Y. Cui, T. Morera-Herreras, J.-M. Deniau, and L. Venance, Distinct coincidence detectors govern the corticostriatal spike timing-dependent plastic-ity, The Journal of physiology 588 , 3045 (2010).