Title: Navigation driven by bidirectional information transmission between sensing and actuation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.26798v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jul 2026 00:48:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Navigation driven by bidirectional information transmission between sensing and actuation 

Avishek Das 1, ∗ and Pieter Rein ten Wolde 2, †

> 1

Department of Physics, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK 

> 2

AMOLF, Science Park 104, 1098 XG, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 

(Dated: July 30, 2026) A wide variety of biological functions are driven by feedback between sensing and actuation. A paradigmatic example is cellular navigation. During navigation, the sensory system maps the en-vironmental input signal onto a sensory output, which then drives an actuation response, changing the future sensory input. How the accuracy of this bidirectional information transmission controls navigation is not currently understood. Here, we study how information controls navigation by analytically solving two generic models that describe two major classes of biological navigators: spatial- and temporal-sensing cells. We find that, in the linear-response regime of shallow gradients, navigation performance is fully determined by the strengths and timescales of bidirectional informa-tion transmission, without any explicit dependence on the elementary parameters of the navigator. We call these relations Behavioral Equations of State (BESTs): equalities that map information to function in a system-independent way. BESTs predict an experimentally testable data collapse for the performance of navigators with different sensing and actuation parameters. We test the valid-ity of our theory by performing stochastic simulations of chemotaxis of the bacterium Escherichia coli , computing transfer entropies exactly with the TE-PWS algorithm. The observed performance obeys the BEST without fitting or scaling parameters. Thus, our theory identifies bidirectional information transmission between sensing and actuation as an organizing principle for navigation. 

Feedback between input and response is central to bio-logical systems. Examples span scales: immune response to infection within an organism, 1 host-pathogen interac-tions during transmission through a population, 2 devel-oping tissues that respond to morphogen gradients while simultaneously shaping them, 3 social interactions, 4 and navigation. In all these cases, the input generates a re-sponse, the response reshapes the future input, and bio-logical function emerges from this feedback between in-put sensing and actuation. Importantly, in many of these cases, if not all, sensing and actuation are stochastic. Yet, a quantitative understanding of how function is enabled and constrained by feedback in the presence of noise is currently lacking. In this manuscript, we study this question using a mini-mal and experimentally accessible model system: cellular navigation. During navigation, the sensory system de-tects the environmental signal, relays it to the actuation system, which alters the cell’s swimming direction and thereby reshapes the future input. Crucially, successful navigation requires accurate sensorimotor feedback: the sensory system must reliably encode the input into an internal representation, the sensory output, and the ac-tuation system must reliably convert the sensory output into motion. To understand navigation, we must there-fore quantify not only the information transmitted from the sensory input to the sensory output, but also the in-formation transmitted from the sensory output, through the actuation system, back to the future sensory input. Equally important, we must also ask whether this bidi-rectional information flow is functional: whether it ac-tually improves navigation. However, while in the past decades the field has made tremendous progress in char-acterizing information transmission from input to output in the absence of feedback, 5–14 and how that constrains navigation, 15 the flow of information in both directions, created by the sensorimotor feedback, has not been char-acterized so far. Moreover, how this bidirectional infor-mation flow enables and limits navigation has never been quantified for any stochastic navigator. Quantifying how navigation is controlled by bidirec-tional information flow is challenging. Both navigation and information are macroscopic observables that emerge from the interplay between the elementary parameters of the system, such as signaling gain, sensory noise, and actuation strength. To identify the relevant combina-tions of parameters that control navigation and infor-mation, analytical theory is vital. Moreover, the theory needs to recognize that in biological systems the infor-mation is often encoded not in the instantaneous values, but rather in the trajectories of the input and output signals. 8,11,12,16–18 For example, the bacterial chemotaxis system does not simply measure the current ligand con-centration, but compares the current input with its re-cent past, thereby estimating a temporal derivative over its memory timescale. 19 Last but not least, both the sen-sory and the actuation systems are often inherently non-linear, and these nonlinearities tend to be amplified by the feedback between input sensing and actuation. To address these challenges, we start by analyzing min-imal but generic models that can be solved analytically. Motivated by the observation that relatively large eu-karyotic cells estimate a spatial derivative of the input concentration while relatively small and fast-moving bac-arXiv:2607.26798v1 [physics.bio-ph] 29 Jul 2026 2teria take a temporal derivative, 20 we develop our the-ory for both spatial and temporal cellular sensing sys-tems. The spatial-sensing model is linear and can be fully solved analytically using stochastic control theory, while the temporal-sensing model is weakly nonlinear, but can be solved by combining stochastic filtering theory with perturbation theory. Remarkably, for both modes of sensing, we find that in the linear-response regime of shallow gradients, navigation performance is determined by the strengths and timescales of only two information-theoretic quantities: the feedforward transfer entropy from sensory input to sensory output, and the feedback transfer entropy from sensory output, through actuation, back to the future sensory input. The system-specific parameters, like signaling gain, sensory noise and actu-ation strength, affect navigation only through their ef-fects on information acquisition and transmission. This suggests that information acts as the universal currency for stochastic navigation across systems and scales. Im-portantly, this universal relation between navigation and information is obtained only when information is quan-tified via the multi-step transfer entropy, which accounts for information encoded in entire signal trajectories. 21 

Single-step transfer entropies are insufficient. Strikingly, our analysis also reveals that generating information that is functional is non-trivial: when the actuation is too strong, both the feedforward and feedback information are high, yet the navigational performance is poor. Finally, to test whether our analytical predictions also hold beyond the minimal models, we study by simula-tions the chemotaxis system of the bacterium Escherichia coli . This system is not only the best characterized senso-rimotor system in biology, but it also provides a stringent test case because both the sensory pathway 22 and the ac-tuation system, 23 the flagellar motor, are highly nonlin-ear. To compute the transfer entropies for this nonlinear system, we employ our recently developed TE-PWS al-gorithm, which makes it possible to quantify transfer en-tropies exactly for any stochastic model. 24 Strikingly, we find that in the regime of shallow gradients, the relation between navigation and information as predicted by our analytical theory holds, without any fitting or scaling pa-rameters. We refer to this equality as a Behavioral Equa-tion of State (BEST): an equation that relates a macro-scopic behavioral variable, navigation performance, to macroscopic information flows, without explicit reference to the microscopic parameters of the system. 

> RESULTS

To analytically investigate the role of information transmission in navigation, we construct two minimal dy-namical models for sensing and actuation. These models describe the two major navigation strategies employed by biological navigators: spatial and temporal sensing. Spatial-sensing cells estimate the chemoattractant gra-dient by comparing the concentration at the front and the back of the cell. This strategy is therefore used by navigators that are large enough for the difference in con-centration across their cell length to be measurable, such as eukaryotic cells. 25 In contrast, smaller cells, such as prokaryotes, use temporal sensing: they infer the gradi-ent from temporal changes in the attractant concentra-tion while they swim. 20 

Our models for spatial and temporal sensing are lin-ear and weakly nonlinear, respectively. Each model in-corporates all the key elementary parameters of generic navigators, such as sensory gain, adaptation time, and actuator gain. The most important feature of these models is, however, the presence of sensing and actua-tion noise. This noise is physical in origin, arising from the stochasticity of the molecular sensing and actuation reactions. 20,26 Such noise affects all general navigators with finite resource constraints, such as limited copy numbers of receptors and signaling molecules, 27 and a finite energy budget. 28 

Noise reduces the accuracy of both sensing and actua-tion. It therefore poses a severe challenge, because nav-igation can only be efficient if the sensory system con-structs an accurate internal representation of the input signal, and if the actuation system accurately translates this internal representation into a new swimming direc-tion. Therefore, navigation performance should depend on how accurately cells relay environmental information from the sensory input to the sensory output through the sensory system, and from the sensory output, through the actuation system, back to the future sensory input (see Fig. 1A). These information flows can be quantified using information theory. In information theory, the bidirectional information transmission between sensing and actuation in steady-state is quantified via transfer entropy rates. 21 Fig. 1B illustrates the transfer entropy rate from the sensory input trajectory s[−∞ ,t ] to the sensory output trajec-tory f[−∞ ,t ]. The transfer entropy rate is the average log-likelihood ratio between predicting the future output from the past input and output trajectories, and predict-ing it from the past output trajectory alone. It therefore quantifies how much the past input trajectory improves the prediction of the future output, beyond the infor-mation already contained in the past output trajectory itself. We call this transfer entropy rate, which quantifies the rate of directional information transmission through the sensory system, the feedforward transfer entropy rate ˙TFF . The transfer entropy rate from the sensory output, through the actuation system, back to the future input is defined analogously, and is called the feedback transfer entropy rate ˙TFB . Importantly, the transfer entropy rates account for information contained in the full past trajec-tories of the signals, and therefore effectively incorporate information stored in intermediate layers of signaling. 3              

> FIG. 1. Bidirectional information transmission drives navigation. (A) The chemoattractant concentration is the sensory input (red) for a navigating cell. The sensory system maps the input to a sensory output (blue). The reliability of this mapping is quantified by the feedforward information TFF . The actuation system, in turn, responds to the sensory output, changing the cell’s motion and thereby the future sensory input. This closes the feedback loop and gives rise to the feedback information transmission, TFB . Navigation emerges from the interplay of TFF and TFB . (B) Given steady-state trajectories of the input and output up to time t,s[−∞ ,t ]and f[−∞ ,t ], the transfer entropy rate is defined as the average log-likelihood ratio per unit time, with δt →0,between predicting the future output from the past input and output trajectories, and predicting it from only the past output.

Nevertheless, accurate information transmission is not sufficient for efficient navigation. The transmitted infor-mation must also be functional: it must improve nav-igation. Biological navigators typically face different navigation objectives, depending on their environment, such as climbing gradients quickly, escaping from lo-cal concentration minima, or remaining near concentra-tion peaks. 29,30 To quantify navigation performance, we choose two paradigmatic navigation objectives in ideal-ized environments: the drift speed up a linear concentra-tion ramp, and the degree of localization near a harmonic concentration peak. For analytical tractability, we study the degree of localization in the spatial-sensing model and the drift speed in the temporal-sensing model. 

> Minimal model for spatial sensing

The minimal model for spatial sensing near a chemoat-tractant concentration peak is shown in Fig. 2A. The position and the velocity of the cell are denoted by x and 

v respectively. The chemoattractant peak is quadratic in 

x with a curvature k. The cell senses the gradient −kx 

with a sensory gain G and encodes its estimate of the gradient in the internal representation f . This sensory output then drives the actuation system with an actuator gain J to change the cell’s velocity, which in turn affects its future position. Both f and v relax to their mean values, here taken to be zero, with rates F and H, re-spectively. Additionally, both sensing and actuation are affected by Gaussian white noise, with respective noise magnitudes Df and Dv .The model exhibits chemotaxis through bidirectional feedback between noisy sensing and actuation. Fig. 2B shows typical steady-state trajectories of x(t) and f (t). When the cell fluctuates to a large positive x, far away from the peak, the local gradient −kx becomes strongly negative. The sensory system transmits this signal to the sensory output f , which therefore becomes anti-correlated with x. The negative sensory output then bi-ases the velocity to negative values, driving the cell back to the peak. In this way, the bidirectional feedback keeps the cell localized near the peak. We quantify navigation performance by this degree of peak localization. Specifically, as our performance metric 

P, we choose the inverse steady-state variance of the cell’s position x, P = 1 /σ 2

> x

. In the localized steady-state, the bidirectional information transmission between sensing and actuation is quantified by the transfer entropy rates ˙Tx→f and ˙Tf →x.To compare performance with information, we first express both the navigation performance measure and the information metrics in dimensionless forms. We normalize the performance P by P0 = 1 /∆x20, where ∆x0 = σv, 0/H is the persistence length of the cell in the absence of actuation, i.e. the typical distance over which its velocity remains correlated. Similarly, we normalize the feedforward and feedback transfer entropy rates by the memory timescales of the respective input signals in the absence of bidirectional coupling: 1/F for sensing and 1 /H for actuation. These observables are, in principle, experimentally measurable for a navigator. The position x and veloc-ity v of the navigating cell can be measured through 3D tracking experiments. 31 The internal representation 

f can be measured by fluorescence microscopy, through the activity or concentration of signaling proteins. 32 The transfer entropy rates can be quantified from the exper-4                                                                  

> FIG. 2. Performance in spatial sensing depends on all elementary parameters. (A) Schematic illustration of the minimal model for spatial sensing. The attractant concentration profile is harmonic in position xwith curvature k. The sensory input is the gradient −kx , which is mapped to a sensory output fwith sensory gain Gand sensory noise Df.The sensory output, in turn, modulates the velocity vwith an actuator gain Jand actuation noise Dv.The variables fand vrelax to zero with rates Fand H, respectively. (B) Chemotaxis in this model localizes the cell near the concentration peak. Upper panels show a representative trajectory for F= 0 .5, H = 1 , Gk = 0 .3, J = 0 .5, D f=Dv= 2. Lower panels show the definitions of the feedforward and feedback information, and normalized performance, with ∆ x0denoting the persistence length of the cell in the absence of actuation. (C) Performance depends nontrivially on the elementary parameters G, J, F and H.The color map shows the analytically obtained performance as a function of Gand J, with the other model parameters fixed at
> F= 0 .5, H = 1 , D f=Dv= 2. The red line denotes the stability boundary of the model, given by GJ =F H (F+H)/k . The dashed lines represent cross-sections at a fixed J(line a) and a fixed G(line b). Each line exhibits a maximum in performance at an intermediate gain. When both Gand Jare simultaneously optimized, the performance approaches a maximum Pmax
> that depends on the ratio F/H .

imentally measured signal trajectories through the re-cently developed ML-PWS technique. 33 The parameters 

σv0 and H can be inferred from the velocity statistics of cells in which the coupling between sensing and actuation is removed , for example using mutants. 34 Similarly, 1 /F 

can be measured from the dynamics of f in the absence of chemoattractant signals . Therefore, this construction makes it possible to compute the dimensionless naviga-tion performance, feedforward and feedback transfer en-tropies, directly from experimental timeseries data. 

> Performance depends on all elementary parameters

While our spatial-sensing model is minimal, it is still defined by six elementary parameters, all of which are system specific (Fig. 2A). Which of these parameters control navigation performance? And can the perfor-mance be cast in a form that can be understood intu-itively? To address these questions, we solve our model analytically (see Materials and Methods). This yields 

P = GkJ [F H (F + H) − GkJ ]

Df (F + H)J2 + Dv [F 2(F + H) + GkJ ] . (1) Before analyzing the performance in terms of system spe-cific parameters denoted by capital letters, we first de-scribe how the performance depends on the steepness of the gradient k. In the limit of k = 0, the performance goes to zero linearly. For intermediate values of k, as 

k is increased, chemotaxis improves due to a stronger signal, but then decreases as the cell begins to over-shoot the peak after each chemotactic climb. Finally, at 

klim = F H (F + H)/GJ , the performance vanishes again. Beyond klim , the linear model becomes unstable. In bio-logical systems, such an instability would be avoided by bounds on the achievable values of f and v, imposed by physical resource constraints. 35 

We now turn to the question of how navigation per-formance depends on the elementary system parameters. Eq. 1 shows that the performance depends on all the elementary parameters of the system, and in a highly non-trivial way. Fig. 2C illustrates this non-trivial de-pendence, by showing how, for a given gradient k, per-formance varies with the sensory gain G and actuation gain J, keeping the other system parameters constant. For any fixed value of J, performance is maximized at a nonzero value of G, and conversely, for any fixed value of G, performance is maximized at a nonzero value of J,as illustrated by the lines a and b. Crucially, these opti-mal gains themselves depend on the other elementary pa-rameters. Thus, in the space of elementary parameters, sensing and actuation do not contribute independently to navigation performance. Eq. 1 further shows that parameters other than the sensory and actuation gains are also fundamental for navigation: they limit performance even after optimiz-ing over G and J. This optimization yields the maximal performance 

Pmax 

P0

= FH



1 + FH

 r

1 + FH −

r FH

!2

. (2) This expression shows that the relative speed of sensing over actuation, F/H , imposes an upper bound on navi-5gation when all other elementary parameters can be op-timized freely. In this regime, performance can be raised only by increasing the relative rate of sensory informa-tion processing, F/H , and Pmax increases monotonically with F/H .Outside of this optimized regime, however, the behav-ior is far less trivial. In particular, at fixed values of G

and J, the performance is non-monotonic in F , decreas-ing as 1 /F for large F . This optimum arises from the coupling between actuation noise and sensorimotor feed-back: actuation noise, set by Dv , generates fluctuations in the sensory input, and a slow sensory response, i.e. small F , helps to time average this input noise. 36 

This analysis shows that the description in terms of elementary parameters is complete but not transparent. The dependence of navigation performance on the ele-mentary parameters is highly coupled, and sensing and actuation cannot be optimized independently. We there-fore ask whether navigation can instead be expressed in terms of a smaller set of collective variables that con-tribute more directly and independently to performance. We now turn to information theory to identify these vari-ables. 

> Performance depends solely on bidirectional information transmission

The natural candidates for these collective variables are the feedforward and feedback transfer entropies. We now test the central hypothesis of this paper, namely that, at least in a well-defined regime, navigation per-formance can be expressed in terms of these two in-formation flows alone. To this end, we first com-pute the feedforward and feedback transfer entropies for the spatial-sensing model in terms of the elemen-tary system parameters, using control theory 37 (see Materials and Methods). The exact expressions are 

TFF = [ p1 + (2 Gk/H 2)( Dv /D f )1/2 − 1] /2 and TFB =[p1 + ( J2/F 2)( Df /D v ) − 1] /2. We then combine these expressions with Eq. 1 to eliminate the elementary sys-tem parameters in favor of the two information-theoretic quantities. We find that in the regime of shallow gradi-ents, i.e. small k, this gives the following equality: 

PP0

= TFF 12

p(2 TFB + 1) 2 − 1 + 1√(2 TFB +1) 2−1



.

(3) This is the first central result of this paper. It shows that in the linear-response regime of shallow gradients navigation is controlled by bidirectional information flow alone. The elementary system parameters affect naviga-tion only through their effect on information transmis-sion. Moreover, the equality reveals that in this regime the performance factorizes into two independent contri-butions, from the feedforward and feedback transfer en-tropies, respectively. We refer to Eq. 3 as a Behavioral Equation of State, because it relates navigation perfor-mance directly to the feedforward and feedback informa-tion flows, without explicit reference to the elementary system parameters. The dependence of the navigation performance on in-formation, Eq. 3, reveals deeper insights into navigation in shallow gradients. The performance increases mono-tonically with the feedforward information TFF . In shal-low gradients where sensory information is a limiting re-source, more feedforward information is always useful. In contrast, the dependence on feedback information is non-monotonic: performance is maximized at an optimal feedback information T ∗ 

> FB

= ( √2 − 1) /2 nats. Too much feedback information is detrimental to performance. To elucidate the origin of the optimal information feed-back in this regime of shallow gradients, it is useful to analyze the bounds that follow from our navigation-information equality, Eq. 3. In particular, Eq. 3 implies that the performance is bounded by 

PP0

≤ MIN {4TFF 

pTFB , TFF , TFF 

TFB 

}. (4) These bounds are illustrated in Fig. 3A, which shows the performance as the feedback information is varied while the feedforward information is kept constant. In the regime of weak feedback, the performance is limited by the first argument of Eq. 4: navigation depends on both the feedforward and feedback information, and a stronger feedback information improves navigation be-cause the actuation system responds more accurately to the information provided by the sensory system. At the optimal feedback information T ∗

> FB

, navigation is lim-ited by the feedforward information alone, correspond-ing to the second argument of Eq. 4; here, navigation can be improved only by improving the sensory system. For stronger feedback, navigation performance decreases with with increasing information feedback, as captured by the third argument of Eq. 4. In this regime, the ac-tuation system responds too sensitively to the sensory output, making navigation susceptible to sensory noise. Further mechanistic insight is obtained by analyzing the performance in terms of the elementary system param-eters. This reveals that the optimal feedback informa-tion T ∗ 

> FB

is associated with an optimal actuation strength 

J∗ = F pDv /D f : a higher sensory noise Df calls for weaker actuation. In the regime of shallow gradients, the optimal feedback information thus arises from the trade-off between responding to the sensory signal but not to sensory noise; the optimum is not associated with the phenomenon of concentration peak overshoots, seen for steeper gradients. Eq. 1 shows that in shallow gradients, navigation is controlled by bidirectional information flow alone. But do additional constraints emerge for steeper gradients? For any value of gradient steepness k, we can express the 6

FIG. 3. In the spatial-sensing model, navigation performance is controlled by bidirectional information transmission. (A) In shallow gradients, navigation performance is controlled by the feedforward and feedback information alone. The black solid line illustrates the equality of Eq. 3, showing how per-formance varies with feedback information at fixed feedfor-ward information; for plotting, TFF has been set to 1 nat. The dashed grey line denotes the optimal feedback infor-mation. The colored solid lines indicate the three bounds on performance in the corresponding limiting regimes (Eq. 4). (B) In steep gradients, the relative rate of sensory infor-mation processing over actuation imposes an additional con-straint on navigation, beyond the feedforward and feedback information. The panel shows how performance monotoni-cally improves with ρ = F/H at fixed feedforward and feed-back information. The linear model becomes unstable when 

ρ < ρ lim = [(2 TFF + 1) 2 − 1] p(2 TFB + 1) 2 − 1 /2 − 1. At large ρ, the performance asymptotically approaches the per-formance in shallow gradients for the same amounts of feed-forward and feedback information. This curve was obtained by first computing the feedforward and feedback information for F = 0 .5, H = J = 1 , Gk = 3 , D f = 0 .1, D v = 2, and then varying ρ.

navigation performance as 

PP0

= eTFF eTFB ρ[1 + ρ − eTFF eTFB ]

ρ(1 + ρ)(1 + eT 2FB ) + eTFF eTFB 

, (5) where ρ = F/H , while eTFF = [(2 TFF + 1) 2 − 1] /2 and 

eTFB = p(2 TFB + 1) 2 − 1 are monotonically increasing functions of TFF and TFB , respectively. In shallow gradi-ents, where eTFF is small compared to ρ, this expression indeed reduces to Eq. 3. For steeper gradients, however, this is no longer true: in this regime, navigation is con-trolled not only by the feedforward and feedback trans-fer entropies, but also by the relative rate of information processing over actuation, ρ.In steep gradients, the fundamental collective variables that control navigation are thus TFF , TFB and ρ. The implications are twofold. First, at fixed TFF and TFB ,the performance can only be raised by increasing ρ, as shown in Fig. 3B. Secondly, the performance in steep gradients is bounded by 

PP0

≤ eTFF eTFB ρ[1 + ρ]

ρ(1 + ρ)(1 + eT 2FB ) = eTFF 

 eTFB + 1

> eTFB

 , (6) which is the performance in shallow gradients for the same amount of bidirectional information. Therefore, the same amounts of feedforward and feedback information are less useful to the navigating cell in steeper gradients than in shallow gradients, unless the information is ac-quired and processed sufficiently rapidly. 

Single-step transfer entropy does not fully determine performance 

The utility of the bidirectional transfer entropy rates as fundamental variables for navigation crucially depends on accounting for the full history of the signal trajecto-ries. If the history is instead truncated to only the current signal state, the resultant transfer entropy is called the single-step transfer entropy. 37 We test the applicability of this truncation in the spatial-sensing model by analyt-ically solving for the single-step transfer entropy rates. We find that the difference between the single-step and the full history-dependent transfer entropy rates can be large, and even diverge in the regime of weak actuation. Moreover, as we describe in the SI, we find that the navi-gation performance cannot be expressed in terms of these one-step transfer entropy rates alone. This demonstrates that the full signal history must be accounted for to un-derstand how information controls navigation. 

Minimal model for temporal sensing 

We next consider navigators that use temporal sens-ing. This strategy is intrinsically nonlinear: because the 7sensory output is a scalar and therefore lacks directional information, it cannot directly steer the cell’s velocity as in the spatial-sensing model. Instead, it modulates the rate at which the cell reorients, thereby biasing future motion only through the statistics of directional changes. We therefore analyze a weakly nonlinear model that is inspired by the chemotaxis system of E. coli .38 To keep the model analytically tractable, we consider a constant chemoattractant gradient. The minimal model consists of the sensory output f

and the velocity v of a cell moving in a linear chemoat-tractant concentration profile c(x) = gx (see Fig. 4A). The sensory input is the temporal derivative of the con-centration along the cell’s trajectory, s(t) = dc/dt =(dc/dx ).(dx/dt ) = gv (t). The cell amplifies this sensory input linearly with sensory gain G, while actuation is de-scribed by a bilinear coupling between the sensory output and the velocity, with actuator gain J. This bilinear form for the coupling can be derived from a strongly nonlinear model of the chemotaxis system of E. coli in the regime of small noise. 38 As in the spatial sensing-model, the sen-sory and actuator relaxation rates are denoted by F and 

H, respectively, and the corresponding noise magnitudes by Df and Dv .Despite the simplicity of the minimal model, it exhibits chemotaxis through nonlinear positive feedback, as ob-served in earlier models of E. coli chemotaxis. 38,39 When the velocity is close to zero, the sensory input is weak and the sensory output stays close to zero. A positive fluctua-tion in the velocity, however, generates a positive sensory input, causing the sensory output f to increase. Through the bilinear coupling between f and v, this positive sen-sory output provides an additional positive drive on the velocity. Positive velocity fluctuations are therefore am-plified and persist longer than negative fluctuations. This asymmetry generates a net drift up the gradient, which we take as the navigation performance, P = ⟨v⟩. Typical trajectories are shown in Fig. 4B, where v(t) displays large positive excursions generated by this positive feed-back loop. To compare the drift speed to the bidirectional transfer entropy, we again need to account for their different phys-ical dimensions, as in the spatial-sensing model. We ex-press the navigation performance P in units of the typical velocity fluctuations of the system in the absence of ac-tuation, P0 = σv0 = pDv /H . We define the feedforward and feedback information by multiplying the correspond-ing transfer entropy rates by the memory timescales of their respective input signals. With this construction, we begin deriving a Behavioral Equation of State for the temporal-sensing model. 

> Nonlinear perturbation theory for information and performance

To derive analytical expression for information trans-mission and navigation performance in the temporal-sensing model, we develop a controlled perturbation the-ory for the regime of weak nonlinearity. Such an approach is necessary because transfer entropy can be computed analytically in closed form for linear stochastic systems, but generally not for nonlinear systems. 8,37 Recent ap-proximate approaches for nonlinear systems are promis-ing, but rely on heuristic approximations that can lead to uncontrolled errors. 40 To obtain controlled analytical expressions up to a prescribed order in the nonlinearity, we combine perturbation theory from statistical physics with stochastic filtering theory. Stochastic filtering theory is directly applicable to the computation of transfer entropy rates. 37,40 The theory describes how an input signal can be reconstructed from the trajectory of a noisy observation of that input. 41 It therefore provides a natural framework for quantifying the information contained in the sensory output about the sensory input, and conversely the information con-tained in the sensory input about the sensory output through the actuation loop. In linear systems, filtering theory yields a Riccati equation that can be solved to ob-tain the transfer entropy rate. We extend this approach to systems with bilinear coupling such as our minimal model for temporal sensing. This leads to a stochastic Riccati equation, which we solve perturbatively to derive analytical expressions for the transfer entropy rates and navigation performance up to second order in the non-linear coupling, the actuator gain J (see Materials and Methods). We test the validity of the analytical expressions by comparing them to numerically exact values obtained from simulations of the minimal model, see Fig. 4C. The exact transfer entropy rates are computed using the TE-PWS algorithm. 24 In the regime of weak nonlinear-ity, corresponding to small values of J, both the nav-igation performance and the information measures are accurately described by the analytical expressions. As the nonlinearity increases, the performance begins to de-viate from the perturbative theory. In the limit of large 

J, the minimal model becomes unstable because of run-away positive feedback between f and v. Biological sys-tems avoid such instabilities through resource-imposed bounds on the maximum attainable values of f and v,similar to the spatial-sensing model. Before we analyze whether navigation performance is controlled by bidirectional information flow alone, we consider the analytical expressions for the transfer en-tropy rates and the navigation performance in terms of the elementary system parameters. These demonstrate several non-trivial consequences of the nonlinear cou-pling. The feedforward transfer entropy rate is ˙Tv→f =8

FIG. 4. In the temporal-sensing model, navigation performance is controlled by bidirectional information transmission. (A) Schematic illustration of temporal-sensing model. The sensory input is the product of the gradient strength, g, and the cell velocity, v. The sensory system maps the input onto the sensory output f , with sensory gain G and sensory noise Df .The sensory output then drives the actuator to modulate the cellular velocity, with actuator gain J and actuation noise 

Dv . The variables f and v relax to zero with rates F and H, respectively. (B) Representative trajectories show gradient climbing through positive feedback. Upper panels show a representative trajectory of the model for F = J = H = 1 , Gg =0.08 , D f = 0 .1, D v = 0 .5. The trajectories show large excursions, due to the positive feedback between f and v. The lower panel defines the normalized performance and information metrics. (C) Nonlinear perturbation theory accurately predicts information transmission and performance. Solid lines are the analytical expressions; symbols correspond to simulation results obtained from the minimal model using the TE-PWS algorithm. (D) Temporal-sensing cells obey the Behavioral Equation of State (BEST). The solid line is the theoretical prediction for the performance from the measured feedforward and feedback information, P/P0 = 4[ ρ/ (1 + ρ)] √TFF 

√TFB , where TFF and TFB are obtained from the numerical simulations using TE-PWS. The uncertainty in the solid line originates from statistical errors in the TE-PWS estimates of TFF and TFB . Symbols show the navigation performance measured directly from the numerical simulations. 

[pH2 + G2g2Dv /D f − H]/2 + J2∆T + O(J3), with the expression for ∆ T given in the Materials and Methods section. Importantly, unlike in the spatial-sensing model, the feedforward information depends on the feedback coupling strength J (see Fig. 4C). The reason is that the positive feedback between f and v enables the actua-tion to change the statistics of the sensory input, thereby improving sensory information transmission. In contrast, the feedback transfer entropy rate, ˙Tf →v =

J2Df /(4 HF ) + O(J3), is independent of the feedforward gain G to this order. Moreover, unlike in the spatial-sensing model, this transfer entropy rate is independent of the actuation noise magnitude Dv . This is because ac-tuation noise has two opposing effects. On the one hand, the precision of actuation is adversely affected by actua-tion noise. On the other hand, this very noise induces the positive feedback loop that generates large excursions in 

v, thereby increasing feedback information. These two effects cancel at this order, making the feedback infor-mation insensitive to actuation noise. Lastly, the drift speed is linear in the actuator gain 

J, P = ⟨v⟩ = JGgD v /[H2(H + F )] + O(J3). There-fore, owing to the positive feedback loop, the drift speed is amplified by the actuator noise Dv , again in marked contrast to spatial sensing. Despite these differences between spatial and temporal sensing, the central challenge remains the same: naviga-tion performance and information transmission depend in a highly nontrivial way on the elementary system pa-rameters. We next show that, as in the spatial-sensing model, navigation can be expressed in terms of informa-tion measures alone. 

Performance depends solely on bidirectional information transmission in temporal sensing 

In the regime of shallow gradients and weak actua-tion, where our perturbation theory applies, we analyt-ically find that the performance is fully determined by 9the amount and speed of bidirectional information trans-mission, 

PP0

= 4 ρ

1 + ρ

pTFF 

pTFB . (7) This is our Behavioral Equation of State for temporal sensing. It shows that, as for spatial sensing, naviga-tion is controlled by bidirectional information transmis-sion alone in the regime of weak actuation and shallow gradients. The elementary system parameters affect nav-igation only through their effects on information trans-mission. Even more strikingly, the expression is simi-lar to that obtained for spatial sensing in this regime, 

P/P0 = 4 TFF 

√TFB (Eq. 4). In both cases, the perfor-mance scales as the square root of the feedback informa-tion. There are also two important differences. First, for temporal sensing navigation performance scales as the square root of the feedforward information, rather than linearly as in spatial sensing (Eqs. 3 and 4). This is a fundamental consequence of the temporal sensing strat-egy: the sensory input depends not only on the gradi-ent strength but also on the cellular motion, while the latter itself also depends on the gradient strength. 15 Sec-ond, the relative speed of sensory processing compared to feedback, ρ = F/H , affects the performance even in the regime of shallow gradients; performance increases monotonically with ρ. This is because the sensory input, given by the velocity v, fluctuates on the timescale of 1/H , regardless of the fact that the gradient is shallow. The sensory system must therefore transmit information faster than this timescale to avoid errors due to dynami-cal lag. 13 In Fig. 4D, we numerically verify that the nu-merically exact results from simulations of the minimal model obey the BEST in the regime of shallow gradients and weak actuator gain.  

> BEST predicts chemotaxis in E. coli

We test the validity of BEST by performing stochastic simulations of a realistic model of the chemotaxis sys-tem of E. coli . E. coli performs chemotaxis by alter-nating between runs and tumbles, and uses a temporal-sensing strategy to modulate the switching propensities between these two motility states. When the bacterium swims up the gradient, the temporal derivative of the concentration is positive. This changes the sensory out-put and decreases the propensity to switch from running to tumbling, thereby prolonging runs in the favorable di-rection. Conversely, when the bacterium swims down the gradient, the switching propensity increases. We there-fore define the dependence of the run-to-tumble switching propensity on the sensory output as the actuator gain. In the simulations, we vary this gain to modulate informa-tion transmission through the actuator, allowing us to test how navigation performance depends on actuator-driven feedback information. We perform agent-based simulations of E. coli using a coarse-grained model with three variables: the sen-sory output f (t), the projection of the swimming di-rection on the gradient direction, n(t), and the motility state δR(t), which equals 1 when the cell is running and 0 when it is tumbling. This model is adopted from a previously developed model. 38 The cell is placed in an exponential concentration profile c(t) = c0egx (t), which corresponds to a linear profile with slope g to log-sensing organisms such as E. coli :42 the sensory input is the tem-poral derivative of the logarithmic concentration, given by d log c/dt = gv (t) = gv 0n(t)δR(t), where v0 is the run speed of the cell. This input drives sensing and actuation through nonlinear equations of motion, ˙f = −F (f − f0) + Ggv 0nδ R + p2Df ψ, (8) 

λR→T(t) = ωR max {[1 − J(f − f0)] , 0}, (9) 

λT→R(t) = ωT , (10) ˙n = −n/ (2 D(δR)) + p(1 − n2)/(2 D(δR)) η. 

(11) Here, F is the adaptation rate, G the sensory gain, J the actuator gain, Df the sensory noise, λR→T and λT→R

are the switching propensities from run to tumble and from tumble to run, respectively, D(δR) is the orienta-tional diffusion constant of the cell, which depends on the motility state of the cell, δR, and ψ and η are Gaus-sian white noise sources. Values of all model parameters are adopted from [38] and are tabulated in the Materials and Methods section. In our theory, the relation between navigation and in-formation depends on a single timescale ratio, ρ = F/H 

(Eq. 7). Here, F is the sensory information process-ing speed, which appears in Eq. 8, and H is the rate at which velocity fluctuations decay. In contrast, the agent-based model of Eqs. 8-11 contains two distinct motility timescales, associated with motor switching and orientational diffusion. This could make the definition of 

H ambiguous. To avoid this ambiguity, we exploit the phenotypic diversity of E. coli , which gives rise to a dis-tribution of wild-type values for the orientational diffu-sion constants. 38 From this distribution, we select values close to the median for which the velocity autocorrelation function is well described by a single exponential decay, thereby defining a single velocity correlation timescale 

H−1.To test the validity of the temporal-sensing BEST, Eq. 7, in this realistic model, we measure P, TFF , TFB and ρ

directly from agent-based simulations. Because the sen-sory input is jointly determined by the run/tumble state of the cell and the swimming direction, we compute the bidirectional transfer entropy rates between the joint tra-jectory of ( n, R ) and the trajectory of the sensory output 

f , using the TE-PWS algorithm. 24 We measure H as 10                           

> FIG. 5. BEST predicts E. coli chemotaxis. (A) Navigation performance as a function of feedback information, for two different gradient strengths g.In each case, the solid line is the BEST prediction for the performance from the mea-sured feedforward and feedback information in the regime of shallow gradients and weak actuation, P/P0= 4[ ρ/ (1 +
> ρ)] √TFF
> √TFB , where TFF and TFB are obtained from the simulations using TE-PWS while varying the actuator gain
> J.The uncertainty in the solid line originates from statis-tical errors in the TE-PWS estimates for TFF and TFB .Be-cause TFF is small and independent of Jwithin the regime considered, the values of TFF for different Jwere averaged to improve the estimate. Symbols show the navigation per-formance measured directly from the numerical simulations. (B) For larger feedback information, the performance exhibits a turnover, revealing an optimal feedback information that maximizes navigation performance.

the decay rate of the velocity autocorrelation function in simulations with J = 0, while F is directly specified by the model. This gives the dimensionless information measures TFF = ˙T(n,R )→f /H and TFB = ˙Tf →(n,R )/F ,together with ρ = F/H . We then compare the rela-tionship between these quantities and navigation perfor-mance with the prediction of Eq. 7. We find that our analytical theory predicts the chemo-tactic performance of E. coli without any fitting or scal-ing parameters, in the regime of shallow gradients and weak actuation (see Fig. 5A). The amount and speed of the bidirectional information transmission fully deter-mine navigation performance in this regime. As we vary the actuator gain J to modulate the feedback informa-tion TFB , the performance changes as predicted by Eq. 7. Likewise, varying the gradient strength changes the feedforward information TFF , and thereby changes the performance as predicted by Eq. 7. This strongly sug-gests that the Behavioral Equation of State, Eq. 7, cap-tures a general principle for temporal-sensing stochastic navigators in the regime of shallow gradients and weak actuation, independent of the microscopic details of their sensory and actuation systems. Finally, inspired by the optimum in the feedback in-formation in the spatial-sensing model, we numerically tested whether such an optimum arises in E. coli chemo-taxis (see Fig. 5B). Our perturbative theory is only applicable to the regime of weak actuation, and there-fore cannot analytically predict either the existence or the position of such an optimum. However, the agent-based simulations show that as the feedback information is varied, the performance exhibits a turnover, with an optimum of around 4 nats. This suggests that the qual-itative design principle identified in the spatial-sensing model extends to realistic temporal-sensing navigators: excessive feedback information can become detrimental to function, because an ultrasensitive actuator amplifies sensory noise. 

> DISCUSSION

We have shown that, for two distinct navigation strate-gies, spatial and temporal sensing, navigation perfor-mance is controlled by bidirectional information trans-mission in the linear-response regime of shallow gradi-ents. System-specific parameters, such as sensory gain, sensory noise, and actuation strength, affect navigation only through their effects on the amount and speed of in-formation transmission. This suggests that information provides a universal organizing principle for stochastic navigation, at least within this regime. Importantly, the same relation also predicts the chemotactic performance of a realistic, nonlinear model of E. coli without any fit-ting or scaling parameters. Recently, Chen et al. independently studied how nav-igation is shaped by bidirectional information flow. 43 

They developed a coarse-grained four-state model suited for experimental data analysis, derived a scaling relation between navigation performance and bidirectional infor-mation flow, and tested it on both synthetic and exper-imental time-series data. Like us, they conclude that bidirectional information drives navigation. However, the two approaches differ in key respects. First, whereas our theory uses history-dependent transfer entropy, their framework relies on single-step transfer entropy. Second, both the feedforward information and, more importantly, 11 the feedback information are defined differently. Navi-gation requires that changes in the sensory output are transmitted through the actuation system to change the future sensory input. Our definition of feedback informa-tion quantifies this closed-loop causal link, from sensory output through actuation back to future input. With this definition, navigation requires nonzero feedback informa-tion, whereas in the framework of Chen et al. navigation can occur with zero feedback information. The equalities we have derived between information transmission and navigation performance predict an ex-perimentally testable data collapse. Specifically, data from different cells or mutants, with different sensing and actuation parameters, such as sensory gain, sen-sory noise, or actuation strength, should collapse on the curve that specifies the relation between navigation per-formance and bidirectional information as predicted by BEST. The required bidirectional information flows can be obtained from experimental timeseries data using the recently developed ML-PWS algorithm. 33 

Although we studied the spatial and temporal sensing strategies for two different navigation objectives, the cor-responding BEST relations are strikingly similar. In the regime of shallow gradients, weak actuation and fast sens-ing ( ρ ≫ 1), the normalized performance is 4 TFF 

√TFB 

for spatial sensing, and 4 √TFF 

√TFB for temporal sens-ing. Thus, the only difference between the two is the dependence on the feedforward information TFF . This difference, however, stems from the fundamental differ-ence in how the gradient is estimated, not the navigation objective. It raises the question of whether the BEST relation also holds for other navigation objectives. We leave this for future work. In our work, we have analyzed idealized environments, such as harmonic concentration peaks and (effectively) linear concentration gradients. However, real environ-ments are likely to be much more complex. Living cells often navigate complex environments, such as turbulent flows, porous soils, or concentration profiles shaped by other cells. 44–46 Such environments generate sensory in-put signals with multiple timescales. Our spatial-sensing model already shows that, while navigation in shallow gradients is controlled by the amount of bidirectional information, steeper gradients also require information to be acquired and processed sufficiently rapidly. This suggests that, in more complex environments, additional collective variables will become important, such as ratios of timescales in sensing, actuation, and environmental variation. A key question is whether navigation perfor-mance in such environments can still be predicted from a limited set of collective variables: bidirectional informa-tion transmission, together with additional variables that capture the temporal structure of sensing, actuation, and environmental variation. Finally, stochastic feedback between input sensing and actuation is central to many biological systems, rang-ing from cellular homeostasis, immune response, virus spreading, and social interactions. In all these cases, the response reshapes the future input of the system, creat-ing closed loops of bidirectional information flow between input sensing and actuation. It is tempting to speculate that other feedback-driven biological systems also obey relations between function and information analogous to the Behavioral Equation of State identified here. 

> MATERIALS AND METHODS Derivation of information and performance measures in spatial-sensing model

We here outline the derivation of the analytical ex-pressions for the information and the performance in the minimal model for spatial sensing. A full derivation is provided in the SI Appendix. Simplifications of the ana-lytical expressions were performed with Wolfram Math-ematica 14.0. The minimal model for spatial sensing is reproduced for convenience, ˙x = v, (12) ˙f = −F f + G. (−kx ) + p2Df ψ, (13) ˙v = −Hv + Jf + p2Dv η. (14) We first note that since ˙ x is deterministic in v, the tra-jectories of x and v can be mapped onto each other one-to-one. Therefore, the full trajectory-dependent transfer entropy rates between f and x are the same as between f

and v. We solve for the latter for analytical convenience. For solving for ˙Tf →v and ˙Tv→f , we extend an existing analytical approach based on stochastic control theory 37 

from two to three dimensions. Below we describe the approach for the feedback transfer entropy rate ˙Tf →v .The derivation for the feedforward transfer entropy rate ˙Tv→f is analogous. The trajectories of Eqs. 12-14 are Gaussian distributed since the dynamics is linear. Therefore, the transfer en-tropy rate is ˙Tf →v = lim 

> δt →0+

12δt ln σ2

> v(t+δt )|v[−∞ ,t ]

σ2

> v(t+δt )|f[−∞ ,t ],v[−∞ ,t ]

, (15) where σ2 

> v(t+δt )|v[−∞ ,t ]

and σ2 

> v(t+δt )|f[−∞ ,t ],v[−∞ ,t ]

are condi-tional variances for v(t + δt ) within two marginal spaces: the space of only v, where both x and f have been marginalized out, and the space of ( f, v ), where only x

has been marginalized out, respectively For obtaining the two variances, we need to solve for the trajectory of v(t) within these two marginal spaces. The effective dynamics within the marginal spaces are defined through the respective causal functions H(v)(t)12 and H(f v )(t). H(v)(t) is the causal function that gen-erates the exact distribution of the v trajectory from a Gaussian white noise ξ(v)(t) with variance 2 Dv , through the equation 

v(t) = 

Z t

> −∞

ds H (v)(t − s)ξ(v)(s). (16) Similarly, H(f v )(t) is the causal matrix that generates the exact joint distribution of the f and v trajectories from Gaussian white noise ζ(f )(t) and ζ(v)(t) with variances 2Df and 2 Dv , through the equations 

f (t) = 

Z t

> −∞

ds 

h

H(f v ) 

> f f

(t − s)ζ(f )(s) + H(f v ) 

> f v

(t − s)ζ(v)(s)

i

,

(17) 

v(t) = 

Z t

> −∞

ds 

h

H(f v ) 

> vf

(t − s)ζ(f )(s) + H(f v ) 

> vv

(t − s)ζ(v)(s)

i

.

(18) Solving for the transfer entropy rate then reduces to solving for the causal functions. This is achieved in Fourier space through a Wiener-Hopf factorization of the power spectrum of the system. For example, H(v)(ω), the Fourier transform of H(v)(t), can be solved from the equation 

Svv (ω) = H(v)(ω).2Dv .H (v)(−ω), (19) where Svv (ω) is the power spectrum of v(t). We achieve this factorization analytically. This gives us the causal functions. The causal functions can then be used to obtain the variances of Eqs. 16 and 18. This, in turn, produces the transfer entropy rate. The navigation performance, P = 1 /σ 2

> x

, is obtained from the stationary covariance matrix C of the model. C

is derived by analytically solving the Lyapunov equation 

AC + CA T = 2 D, where A =



0 0 −1

Gk F 00 −J H

 and D =



0 0 00 Df 00 0 Dv

.

> Nonlinear perturbation theory for information and performance measures in temporal-sensing model

We here outline the derivation of the perturbation theory in the minimal model for temporal sensing. Afull derivation is provided in the SI Appendix. The conceptual framework of the theory was proposed by the authors. The analytical expressions were derived through iterative interactions with Claude Sonnet 4.6 and ChatGPT-5.5 Pro, and verified independently by the au-thors. We reproduce the temporal sensing model here for con-venience, ˙f = −F f + Ggv + p2Df ψ, (20) ˙v = −Hv + Jf v + p2Dv η. (21) Since this is a diffusion process, we can apply the Gir-sanov formula for path measures to express the transfer entropy rates as 37,47 

˙Tv→f = G2g2

4Df

D

P v|f E

, (22) ˙Tf →v = J2

4Dv

D

v2P f |v E

, (23) where P f |v = Var  P (f (t)|v[−∞ ,t ]) and P v|f =Var  P (v(t)|f[−∞ ,t ]) are conditional variances. The an-gular brackets ⟨ · ⟩ denote a steady-state average over the conditioned variable, in each case. Since the nonlinear coupling term is, in fact, bilinear, the conditional probability distributions P (f (t)|v[−∞ ,t ])and P (v(t)|f[−∞ ,t ]) are still Gaussian. They satisfy the 

stochastic Riccati equations, 48 

˙P v|f = 2[ −H + Jf (t)] P v|f + 2 Dv − G2g2

2Df

(P v|f )2, (24) ˙P f |v = −2F P f |v + 2 Df − J2v(t)2

2Dv

(P f |v )2. (25) In the limit of the actuator gain J = 0, the above equations can be exactly solved. For solving them at a small non-zero value of J, we construct a perturbation expansion in J for all the stochastic variables in the above equations: 

P v|f (t) = P v|f 

> 0

(t) + JP v|f 

> 1

(t) + J2P v|f 

> 2

(t)2 + . . . (26) 

P f |v (t) = P f |v 

> 0

(t) + JP f |v 

> 1

(t) + J2P f |v 

> 2

(t)2 + . . . (27) 

f (t) = f0(t) + Jf 1(t) + J2f2(t) + . . . (28) 

v(t) = v0(t) + Jv 1(t) + J2v2(t) + . . . . (29) To solve for the unknown terms at each order of pertur-bation, we substitute these expansions into the stochastic Riccati equations 24 and 25 as well as the Langevin equa-tions 20 and 21. This yields self-consistent equations that are exactly solvable (see SI Appendix). This allows us to obtain analytical expressions for P v|f (t) and P f |v (t) upto a given order in J.Finally, substituting the resultant solutions for P v|f (t)and P f |v (t) into Eqs. 22 and 23 yields the analytical expressions for the transfer entropy rates. The derivation of the performance ⟨v⟩ is similar to that of the transfer entropy rates. Substituting Eq. 29 in Eq. 21 and taking the average relates the first order cor-rection in ⟨v⟩ to the unperturbed stationary covariance 

⟨f v ⟩0; the second order correction vanishes due to sym-metry. The average ⟨f v ⟩0 is an element of the stationary 13 

TABLE I. Model parameters for E. coli adopted from [38] Parameter Numerical Value 

f0 1.39 

F 0.1 s−1

G 29 .4

v0 20 μm s −1

Df 0.096 s−1

ωR 0.55 s−1

ωT 3.05 s−1

Drun 0.062 s−1

Dtumble 37 Drun 

covariance matrix C at J = 0. C is derived by analyti-cally solving the Lyapunov equation AC + CA T = 2 D,where A =

F −Gg 

0 H



and D =

Df 00 Dv



.

Analytical expressions for transfer entropy rates in temporal-sensing model 

The quantity ∆ T , used in the perturbative expression of ˙Tv→f in section ‘Nonlinear perturbation theory for in-formation and performance’, is given by ∆T = Df (S2 − H2)( H2F − H2S + 2 F S 2 + 4 S3)2H2F S (F + H)( F + 2 S)( H + 2 S) ,

(30) where S is defined as pH2 + G2g2Dv /D f .

Chemotaxis in E. coli 

Our model for E. coli chemotaxis is adopted from the model developed in [38], which has parameter values esti-mated from the experiments in [42, 49–52]. The variable 

f , the sensory output, mimics the activity of the signaling protein CheY, which depends on the free-energy differ-ence between the active and inactive state of the cellular receptors, which in turn depends on their ligand-binding state and methylation level. The values of the elementary parameters of the model are given in Table I. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

We thank Vahe Galstyan, Daan Mulder, and the Emonet group for useful discussions. This work is part of the Dutch Research Council (NWO) and was performed at the research institute AMOLF. This project has re-ceived funding from the European Research Council un-der the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and in-novation program (grant agreement No. 885065). A.D. acknowledges start-up funding from Durham University.  

> ∗

avishek.das@durham.ac.uk  

> †

p.t.wolde@amolf.nl [1] C. E. Cressler, D. C. Metz, D. A. C. Van Oordt, and A. L. Graham, Immunological feedback loops generate parasite persistence thresholds that explain variation in infection duration, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 291 , 20240934 (2024). [2] M. Meijers, D. Ruchnewitz, J. Eberhardt, M. Luksza, and M. L¨ assig, Population immunity predicts evolution-ary trajectories of sars-cov-2, Cell 186 , 5151 (2023). [3] A. Pezzotta and J. Briscoe, Optimal control of gene regu-latory networks for morphogen-driven tissue patterning, Cell Systems 14 , 940 (2023). [4] L. O’Shaughnessy, T. Izawa, I. Masai, J. W. Shaevitz, and G. J. Stephens, Dynamics of dominance in interact-ing zebrafish, PRX Life 2, 043006 (2024). [5] E. Ziv, I. Nemenman, and C. H. Wiggins, Optimal signal processing in small stochastic biochemical networks, PloS one 2, e1077 (2007). [6] P. Mehta, S. Goyal, T. Long, B. L. Bassler, and N. S. Wingreen, Information processing and signal integration in bacterial quorum sensing, Molecular systems biology 

5, MSB200979 (2009). [7] J. O. Dubuis, G. Tkacik, E. F. Wieschaus, T. Gregor, and W. Bialek, Positional information, in bits, arXiv preprint arXiv:1201.0198 (2011). [8] F. Tostevin and P. R. Ten Wolde, Mutual information be-tween input and output trajectories of biochemical net-works, Physical review letters 102 , 218101 (2009). [9] R. Cheong, A. Rhee, C. J. Wang, I. Nemenman, and A. Levchenko, Information transduction capacity of noisy biochemical signaling networks, science 334 , 354 (2011). [10] M. Voliotis, R. M. Perrett, C. McWilliams, C. A. McAr-dle, and C. G. Bowsher, Information transfer by leaky, heterogeneous, protein kinase signaling systems, Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , E326 (2014). [11] J. Selimkhanov, B. Taylor, J. Yao, A. Pilko, J. Albeck, A. Hoffmann, L. Tsimring, and R. Wollman, Accurate information transmission through dynamic biochemical signaling networks, Science 346 , 1370 (2014). [12] A. A. Granados, J. M. Pietsch, S. A. Cepeda-Humerez, I. L. Farquhar, G. Tkaˇ cik, and P. S. Swain, Distributed and dynamic intracellular organization of extracellular information, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences 115 , 6088 (2018). [13] A. J. Tjalma, V. Galstyan, J. Goedhart, L. Slim, N. B. Becker, and P. R. Ten Wolde, Trade-offs between cost and information in cellular prediction, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120 , e2303078120 (2023). [14] H. H. Mattingly, K. Kamino, J. Ong, R. Kottou, T. Emonet, and B. B. Machta, E. coli chemosensing accu-racy is not limited by stochastic molecule arrivals, Nature Physics , 1 (2026). [15] H. Mattingly, K. Kamino, B. Machta, and T. Emonet, Escherichia coli chemotaxis is information limited, Na-ture physics 17 , 1426 (2021). [16] C. Marshall, Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase sig-naling: transient versus sustained extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation, Cell 80 , 179 (1995). 14 

[17] J. E. Purvis and G. Lahav, Encoding and decoding cel-lular information through signaling dynamics, Cell 152 ,945 (2013). [18] J. H. Levine, Y. Lin, and M. B. Elowitz, Functional roles of pulsing in genetic circuits, Science 342 , 1193 (2013). [19] J. E. Segall, S. M. Block, and H. C. Berg, Temporal com-parisons in bacterial chemotaxis., Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Sciences 83 , 8987 (1986). [20] H. C. Berg and E. M. Purcell, Physics of chemoreception, Biophysical journal 20 , 193 (1977). [21] T. Schreiber, Measuring information transfer, Physical review letters 85 , 461 (2000). [22] V. Sourjik and H. C. Berg, Receptor sensitivity in bac-terial chemotaxis, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 , 123 (2002). [23] P. Cluzel, M. Surette, and S. Leibler, An ultrasensitive bacterial motor revealed by monitoring signaling proteins in single cells, Science 287 , 1652 (2000). [24] A. Das and P. R. Ten Wolde, Exact computation of trans-fer entropy with path weight sampling, Physical Review Letters 135 , 107404 (2025). [25] P. N. Devreotes and S. H. Zigmond, Chemotaxis in eu-karyotic cells: a focus on leukocytes and dictyostelium, Annual review of cell biology 4, 649 (1988). [26] K. Kaizu, W. De Ronde, J. Paijmans, K. Takahashi, F. Tostevin, and P. R. Ten Wolde, The berg-purcell limit revisited, Biophysical journal 106 , 976 (2014). [27] G. Malaguti and P. R. Ten Wolde, Theory for the opti-mal detection of time-varying signals in cellular sensing systems, Elife 10 , e62574 (2021). [28] T. E. Ouldridge, C. C. Govern, and P. R. ten Wolde, Thermodynamics of computational copying in biochemi-cal systems, Physical Review X 7, 021004 (2017). [29] A. Celani and M. Vergassola, Bacterial strategies for chemotaxis response, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 , 1391 (2010). [30] N. W. Frankel, W. Pontius, Y. S. Dufour, J. Long, L. Hernandez-Nunez, and T. Emonet, Adaptability of non-genetic diversity in bacterial chemotaxis, Elife 3,e03526 (2014). [31] K. Taute, S. Gude, S. Tans, and T. Shimizu, High-throughput 3d tracking of bacteria on a standard phase contrast microscope, Nature communications 6, 8776 (2015). [32] V. Sourjik, A. Vaknin, T. S. Shimizu, and H. C. Berg, In vivo measurement by fret of pathway activity in bacterial chemotaxis, in Methods in enzymology , Vol. 423 (Elsevier, 2007) pp. 365–391. [33] M. Reinhardt, G. Tkaˇ cik, and P. R. t. Wolde, Ml-pws: Estimating the mutual information between experimen-tal time series using neural networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16509 (2025). [34] E. A. Korobkova, T. Emonet, H. Park, and P. Cluzel, Hidden stochastic nature of a single bacterial motor, Physical review letters 96 , 058105 (2006). [35] C. C. Govern and P. R. Ten Wolde, Optimal resource allocation in cellular sensing systems, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 17486 (2014). [36] N. B. Becker, A. Mugler, and P. R. Ten Wolde, Optimal prediction by cellular signaling networks, Physical review letters 115 , 258103 (2015). [37] R. Chetrite, M. Rosinberg, T. Sagawa, and G. Tarjus, Information thermodynamics for interacting stochastic systems without bipartite structure, Journal of Statis-tical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2019 , 114002 (2019). [38] J. Long, S. W. Zucker, and T. Emonet, Feedback between motion and sensation provides nonlinear boost in run-and-tumble navigation, PLoS computational biology 13 ,e1005429 (2017). [39] M. Flores, T. S. Shimizu, P. R. ten Wolde, and F. Tostevin, Signaling noise enhances chemotactic drift of e. coli, Physical review letters 109 , 148101 (2012). [40] A.-L. Moor and C. Zechner, Dynamic information trans-fer in stochastic biochemical networks, Physical Review Research 5, 013032 (2023). [41] K. J. ˚ Astr¨ om, Introduction to stochastic control theory 

(Courier Corporation, 2012). [42] T. S. Shimizu, Y. Tu, and H. C. Berg, A modular gradient-sensing network for chemotaxis in escherichia coli revealed by responses to time-varying stimuli, Molec-ular systems biology 6, MSB201037 (2010). [43] K. S. Chen, M. P. Leighton, D. A. Clark, and T. Emonet, A behavior-environment information loop drives sensory navigation, arXiv:XXXX.XXXXX (2026), to be submit-ted. [44] J. R. Taylor and R. Stocker, Trade-offs of chemotactic foraging in turbulent water, Science 338 , 675 (2012). [45] P. de Anna, A. A. Pahlavan, Y. Yawata, R. Stocker, and R. Juanes, Chemotaxis under flow disorder shapes mi-crobial dispersion in porous media, Nature Physics 17 ,68 (2021). [46] J. Saragosti, V. Calvez, N. Bournaveas, B. Perthame, A. Buguin, and P. Silberzan, Directional persistence of chemotactic bacteria in a traveling concentration wave, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 ,16235 (2011). [47] I. V. Girsanov, On transforming a certain class of stochas-tic processes by absolutely continuous substitution of measures, Theory of Probability & Its Applications 5,285 (1960). [48] A. H. Jazwinski, Stochastic processes and filtering theory 

(Courier Corporation, 2007). [49] M. W. Sneddon, W. Pontius, and T. Emonet, Stochastic coordination of multiple actuators reduces latency and improves chemotactic response in bacteria, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 , 805 (2012). [50] H. C. Berg and D. A. Brown, Chemotaxis in escherichia coli analysed by three-dimensional tracking, nature 239 ,500 (1972). [51] J. Saragosti, P. Silberzan, and A. Buguin, Modeling e. coli tumbles by rotational diffusion. implications for chemotaxis, PloS one 7, e35412 (2012). [52] S. Taheri-Araghi, S. Bradde, J. T. Sauls, N. S. Hill, P. A. Levin, J. Paulsson, M. Vergassola, and S. Jun, Cell-size control and homeostasis in bacteria, Current biology 25 ,385 (2015).