Title: Analysis of inter-spike interval statistics in neuronal networks with depolarizing and hyperpolarizing threshold potentials

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18428v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Jul 2026 00:08:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Analysis of inter-spike interval statistics in neuronal networks with depolarizing and hyperpolarizing threshold potentials 

Oliver Gambrell 1 and Abhyudai Singh 2

Abstract — Neuronal communication is mediated in part by changes in neuronal firing rates. The time interval between successive neuronal firings is referred to as the inter-spike interval (ISI), and quantifying its statistics is important for understanding neuronal communication. This paper studies the ISI statistics of a postsynaptic neuron receiving independent excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic action potentials (EI circuit). This circuit is modeled as a classical integrate-and-fire neuron, and the ISI statistics are investigated for both fixed and adaptive threshold potentials. First, a depolarizing adaptive threshold model is studied first, where the threshold potential increases with the postsynaptic membrane potential. Our analysis shows that the ISI noise, quantified as the coefficient of variation, is larger in the adaptive threshold model compared to the fixed threshold model for the same mean ISI. Additionally, simulations reveal that the ISI noise can be either hypo- or hyper-exponential (defined as ISI noise smaller or larger than one, respectively) depending on the frequencies of excitatory and inhibitory inputs. Next, a hyperpolarizing adaptive threshold potential is studied, where the threshold de-creases as the membrane potential hyperpolarizes. Interestingly, this model shows that the postsynaptic neuron can generate action potentials (APs) when driven solely by inhibitory inputs. Furthermore, mean and noise signatures are characterized across model parameters for both excitatory and inhibitory inputs. In summary, this work provides a systematic stochastic analysis of adaptive threshold models for AP generation to understand their role in interneuronal information processing. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The brain is an interconnected network of neurons that communicate through the transmission of electrical signals called action potentials (APs). As APs arrive at the presy-naptic axon terminal, docked synaptic vesicles (SVs) fuse with the membrane and release their neurotransmitter content into the synaptic cleft. These neurotransmitters diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to receptors on ion channels of the postsynaptic neuron, allowing ions to flow across the membrane and alter the membrane potential. Once the membrane potential crosses a threshold, the postsynaptic neuron fires an AP. Following this, the membrane potential returns to a resting potential [1]. The time interval between successive APs, called the inter-spike interval (ISI), is of particular interest in neuroscience, as it reveals information about neuronal firing regularity. This regularity is primarily controlled by the number of SVs                   

> 1O. Gambrell is with the Department of Electrical and Com-puter Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE USA 19716.
> olg@udel.edu
> 2A. Singh is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-ing, Biomedical Engineering, Mathematical Sciences, Center for Bioinfor-matics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware, Newark, DE USA 19716. absingh@udel.edu

that fuse upon the arrival of a presynaptic AP. We refer to the number of SVs that fuse as the quantal content (QC). Previous works have analyzed the statistics of QC including The dynamics of SVs and QC and their effect on postsy-naptic firing statistics were studied in prior works on auditory synapses [2]–[11]. Previous works have also shown that steady-state and transient QC follow a binomial distribution under certain limits [12]–[17]. Furthermore, correlations be-tween successive QC have been shown to be slightly anti-correlated in previous mechanistic models of QC [18]. Mo-tivated by these observations, we model QC as independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables. In previous models of QC, the threshold potential was assumed to be fixed. This assumption does not account for the probabilistic nature of the threshold potential [19] arising from fluctuations in ion channel conductances, such as sodium and potassium [20]. To capture this randomness, previous works have used an adaptive threshold [21]–[24]. In this paper, our goal is to model the random nature of the threshold potential by allowing it to change in response to presynaptic activity. Using a classical integrate and fire model, we consider an excitatory and an inhibitory presy-naptic neuron independently firing AP onto a postsynaptic neuron under the assumption of a fixed threshold potential. We refer to this model as an EI model. The firing behavior of EI models has been studied in prior works on excitatory-inhibitory balance [25]–[29], within neuronal assemblies [30]–[32], and with stochastic models [33]. In this paper, a first-passage-time framework [34]–[36] is used to derive an equation for the time period between two successive postsynaptic APs, known as the inter-spike interval (ISI). FPT problems have been studied in detail in biological systems including gene expression [37]–[44], lysis timing [45]–[48], cellular event timing [49], [50], and in prior works on neuronal modeling [51]. Our FPT analysis show that the noise in the ISI, defined as the coefficient of variation squared of the ISI, is maximized when the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency are both high and approximately equal and the membrane potential remains fixed between presynaptic APs. Next, we allow the threshold potential to increase in response to presynaptic excitation [52], which corresponds biologically to the phenomena where a neuron’s firing frequency decreases after prolonged stimulation [53]. This effect is partly caused by the dynamics of sodium and calcium-activated potassium channels [20], [54], [55]. We refer to this model as a depolarizing adaptive threshold. Our analysis shows that the ISI noise, which we model with the coefficient of variation, is larger for a neuron with arXiv:2607.18428v1 [q-bio.NC] 20 Jul 2026 Fig. 1. A schematic of synaptic transmission and a sample trajectory of the membrane potential from the associated synaptic model. A: Synaptic vesicles docked at docking sites at the active zone of the excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic axon terminals fuse with the membrane and release their neurotransmitter content into the synaptic cleft. These neurotransmitters bind to receptors on the postsynaptic neuron, opening channels that allow ions to flow across the cell and alter its membrane potential. B: A simulated trajectory of the postsynaptic neuron’s membrane potential as modeled in equations (1) and (2). The membrane potential (solid blue line) depolarizes upon the arrival of excitatory presynaptic action potentials (red dashed line), which arrive via a Poisson process with rate fe. Inhibitory presynaptic APs (dashed blue line) arrive via a Poisson process with rate fi. The excitatory and inhibitory QC is modeled as binomial random variables with means ⟨be⟩ = ⟨bi⟩ = 1 and noise CV 2 

> be

= CV 2 

> bi

= 0 .95 , respectively. Between presynaptic APs, the membrane potential returns to a resting potential, here 0, with time constant τv . Once the membrane potential exceeds a threshold potential vth (black line), the postsynaptic neuron fires an action potential (red circles). The inter-spike interval (ISI) is the time period between successive postsynaptic APs. Parameters: fe = 100 Hz, f i = 100 Hz , τv = 10 ms , vth = 20 mV , ce = ci = 20 mV, v r = 0 mV .

a depolarizing adaptive threshold than a neuron with a fixed threshold when the mean ISIs of the two models are equal. Furthermore, simulations reveal that different combinations of excitatory and inhibitory input frequencies can result in the ISI noise being either hypo-exponential (ISI noise is less than one) or hyper-exponential (ISI noise is greater than one). Next, we allow the threshold potential to decrease in response to presynaptic inhibition, modeling the phenom-ena of postinhibitory rebound [56], [57]. The lowering of the threshold potential corresponds biologically to sodium channel recovery from inactivation [58]. We refer to this model as a hyperpolarizing adaptive threshold. Interestingly, this model shows that inhibitory presynaptic APs can elicit postsynaptic APs in the absence of presynaptic excitation. We now formulate the models. A summary of the model parameters is in Table I. II. M ODEL FORMULATION OF AN EXCITATORY -INHIBITORY NEURONAL NETWORK 

A schematic of the system to be modeled is presented in Fig. 1-A. The model, which we refer to as the excitatory-inhibitory (EI) model, was analyzed in [59] and will be restated here for convenience. The arrival times of exci-tatory and inhibitory presynaptic action potentials (APs) are modeled as Poisson processes with rates fe and fi,respectively. Upon the arrival of an excitatory or inhibitory presynaptic AP, synaptic vesicles (SVs) docked at the active zone of the associated presynaptic neuron fuse with the membrane. The number of docked SVs that fuse at the excitatory and inhibitory axon terminals is denoted as be

and bi, respectively. The random variables be and bi are referred to as the excitatory and inhibitory quantal content (QC). For modeling simplicity, be and bi are assumed to 

TABLE I SUMMARY OF MODEL PARAMETERS 

neuron parameter description 

be number of SVs which fuse at the excitatory presynaptic axon terminal 

bi number of SVs which fuse at the inhibitory presynaptic axon terminal presynaptic fe the rate that action potentials arrive at the excitatory presynaptic axon terminal , Hz fi the rate that action potentials arrive at the inhibitory presynaptic axon terminal , Hz v membrane potential, volts τv membrane time constant, sec vr resting potential, volts vth threshold potential, volts T inter-spike interval (ISI), sec 

postsynaptic CV 2 

> T

ISI noise, coefficient of variation squared 

ce excitatory quantal size, volts/ vesicle 

ci inhibitory quantal size, volts/ vesicle 

τth Threshold time constant, sec vth, ∞ steady state threshold potential, volts vb base threshold potential, volts aT scaling parameter 

vI inflection potential, volts vlow minimium threshold potential, volts v1 limiting potential, volts 

be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) binomially distributed random variables. Upon the fusion of SVs, neurotransmitters are released into the synaptic cleft and bind to receptors on postsynaptic membrane. This binding initiates conformational changes in ion channels, allowing ions to flow across the membrane and change the neuronal membrane potential. Representing the membrane potential with a continuous random process v(t),the change in v(t) due to excitatory and inhibitory QC be

and bi is modeled with the following stochastic resets: 

v(t) fe

−→ v(t) + ce × be, v(t) fi

−→ v(t) − ci × bi. (1) In equation (1), the parameters ce and ci, called the excitatory and inhibitory quantal size, represent the average amount of depolarization and polarization the membrane potential experiences per SV fusion, respectively. Between presynaptic APs, v(t) returns to a baseline resting potential vr via the classic integrate-and-fire model: 

dv (t)

dt = −

 v(t) − vr

τv



, (2) where τv is the positively valued membrane time constant that controls the rate at which the membrane potential returns to vr . For modeling simplicity, we assume that vr = 0 .Once v(t) crosses a threshold potential vth , the postsynaptic neuron fires an AP and is assumed to instantly reset to vr . In this section the threshold potential is set to a fixed value, and in later sections vth will be modeled as a random process. Trajectories of the random process v(t), which is subject to the stochastic resets in (1) and the dynamics in (2), are plotted in Fig. 1-B. Having defined the EI model, we now quantify postsynaptic statistics of interest. The time interval between two successive postsynaptic APs is called the inter-spike interval (ISI), and is defined as 

T := inf {t ≥ 0 : v(t) ≥ vth and v(0) = vr }. (3) Both the mean ISI, ⟨T ⟩, and the ISI noise, defined as 

CV 2 

> T

:= ⟨T 2⟩ − ⟨ T ⟩2

⟨T ⟩2 , (4) are analyzed, as studying these metrics together provides insight into the mechanisms of neuronal processing. In equation (4), the notation ⟨ ⟩ denotes the expected value operator. The problem of determining the statistics of T is referred to as a first-passage-time (FPT) problem, and FPT problems have been analyzed in many biological systems [34], [37], [46], [49], including prior works on neuronal modeling [9]. Having defined the model, we now analyze the statistics of its ISI. In particular, we study the ISI noise and the inverse of the mean ISI, called the mean postsynaptic firing frequency. The mean postsynaptic firing frequency is studied instead of the mean ISI for ease of analysis. III. M EAN POSTSYNAPTIC FIRING TIME ANALYSIS OF THE EXCITATORY -INHIBITORY NEURONAL MODEL 

In the previous section, we formulated the model of an ex-citatory and an inhibitory presynaptic neuron independently firing APs onto a postsynaptic neuron, which we called the EI model. The ISI statistics for the EI model are now analyzed. We begin by first defining a few terms:  

> •

N (t) − The number of presynaptic APs which have occurred up to time t. 

> •

uj − The change in v(t) due to the j-th presynaptic AP. uj = cebe if the j-th presynaptic AP is excitatory, and uj = −cibi if inhibitory.  

> •

tj − The arrival time of the j-th presynaptic AP.  

> •

tN (t) − The arrival time of the N (t)-th presynaptic AP. Using these definitions and equations (1) and (2), we can write v(t) as 

v(t) =  

> N(t)

X

> j=1

uj e− tN (t)−tjτv . (5) For simplicity, we solve for ⟨T ⟩ for the specific case of a classical pure integrator (τv → ∞ ) (Fig. 2-A) and assume a small noise approximation. When τv → ∞ , equation (5) becomes 

v(t) =  

> N(t)

X

> j=1

uj . (6) Taking the expected value of (6) yields 

⟨v(t)⟩ =

*N (t)

X

> j=1

uj

+

=

** N (t)

X

> j=1

uj N (t)

++ 

= ⟨N (t)⟩⟨ uj ⟩.

(7) We can solve for ⟨T ⟩ by observing that the arrival times of presynaptic APs are modeled via Poisson processes, implying that the probability of an excitatory presynaptic AP is fe 

> fe+fi

and fi 

> fe+fi

for an inhibitory presynaptic AP. Using this and the fact that N (t) is the sum of two Poisson processes, we can show that 

⟨v(t)⟩ = t (cefe⟨be⟩ − cifi⟨bi⟩) . (8) Making the approximation that ⟨v(⟨T ⟩)⟩ ≈ vth , which is valid when the noise in v(t) is small, we have 

⟨T ⟩ ≈ vth 

cefe⟨be⟩ − cifi⟨bi⟩ , (9) which is defined for cefe⟨be⟩ > c ifi⟨bi⟩.Fig. 2-B and Fig. 2-C show the mean postsynaptic firing frequency for the theoretical equation in (9) and simulations of the model in equations (1) and (2) for τv → ∞,respectively. These plots show that inhibition always reduces the mean postsynaptic firing frequency. Furthermore, when 

fi > f e, both simulations and theoretical predictions show that postsynaptic APs do not occur on average. We resort to simulations for noise in Fig. 2-D, which shows that noise is maximized when fe and fi are both large and fe > f i.When τv → 0, the membrane potential instantly returns to its resting potential after the postsynaptic neuron fires an AP, implying that inhibition has no effect on the ISI statistics. The mean ISI and ISI noise for the case of 

τv → 0 were solved for previously in [60]. The solution was derived by representing the ISI as the sum of the times between successive presynaptic APs, and then computing its moments. We present the results here for simplicity: 

⟨T ⟩ =



fe ×



1 − P



be ≤ vth 

ce

 −1

, (10) 

CV 2 

> T

= 1 , (11) where P is the probability mass function of be. The case of 

0 < τ v < ∞ has been explored in [59], which showed that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is maximized when Theoretical 

Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) 

# C D

# 𝜏 v = ∞

# 𝜏 v = ∞

# B

# 𝜏 v = ∞

# Simulation Simulation 

Membrane potential 

v(t) v th 

ISI Inhibitory AP Excitatory AP Threshold potential Postsynaptic AP Model trajectories for 𝜏 v = ∞

# AMembrain potential (mV) Time t (sec) Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) ISI noise Excitatory input frequency f e (Hz) Inhibitory input frequency  f i (Hz) 

# 𝜏 v = ∞

# 𝜏 v = ∞

Excitatory input frequency f e (Hz) Excitatory input frequency f e (Hz) Inhibitory input frequency  f i (Hz) Inhibitory input frequency  f i (Hz) No firing in black region No firing in black region No firing in black region Fig. 2. The mean postsynaptic firing frequency and inter-spike interval (ISI) noise profile vary with the membrane time constant. A: Trajectories of the membrane and threshold potential in (1) and (2) as a function of time when τv = ∞. The membrane potential (blue line) increases if the arriving presynaptic AP is excitatory and decreases if the arriving presynaptic AP is inhibitory. Upon being driven to the threshold potential vth (black line), the postsynaptic neuron fires an AP (red dot) and resets to a resting potential vr = 0 mV . B: Theoretical predictions of the mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency based on equation (9). C: Simulations of the mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency in (1) and (2). D: Simulations of the ISI noise for a pure integrator as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency. The excitatory and inhibitory QC for each of these plots is modeled as binomial distributions with means 

⟨be⟩ = 1 and noise CV 2 

> be

= 0 .95 . Parameters: τv = 100 ms , τth = 100 ms , vb = 20 mV , vmin = −50 mV , vI = 10 mV , aT = 0 .8 mV ,

ce = ci = 2 mV, v r = 0 mV .

fi is small and fe is high. Additionally, ISI noise was shown to be maximized at intermediate excitatory input frequencies. The model in this section assumed a fixed threshold potential. We now focus on the case of pure excitation and allow the threshold potential to increase in response to postsynaptic activity. We refer to this type of threshold as a depolarizing adaptive threshold. IV. E XCITATORY -INHIBITORY EI NEURONAL NETWORK WITH A DEPOLARIZING ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD 

In the previous section, we formulated the model of an excitatory and an inhibitory presynaptic neuron indepen-dently firing APs onto a postsynaptic neuron, which we called the EI model. This model was analyzed in prior works [59] with a fixed threshold, an assumption which ignores the random nature of the threshold potential [61]. We now improve the model by allowing the threshold potential to adapt with presynaptic firing activity. Inspired by models of sodium channel kinetics [62] and similar to [63], the threshold potential is now modified to be a function of the membrane potential. Specifically, the threshold potential now evolves via 

dv th 

dt = vth, ∞(v) − vth 

τth 

, (12) where τth is a positively-valued threshold time constant, and vth, ∞(v) is the steady-state threshold potential 

vth, ∞(v) := 

(vb, v < v I ,vb + aT (v − vI ), v ≥ vI . (13) In equation (13), the parameter vI , which is the membrane potential level where the vth, ∞ begins to increase, is called the inflection potential. The parameter aT , which controls the rate of increase of vth, ∞, is called the scaling parameter. A plot of equation (13) is shown in Fig. 3-A, and Fig. 3-B shows trajectories of the depolarizing adaptive threshold in (12) and (13) and the membrane potential. Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) C DISI noise Fixed threshold Mean postsynaptic firing frequencies are equal Depolarizing adaptive threshold 

Fixed threshold Depolarizing adaptive threshold 

Inflection potential Steady state threshold potential Base threshold potential A BDepolarizing adaptive threshold Trajectory simulations, no inhibition 

Membrane potential Inflection potential Threshold potential Base threshold potential Postsynaptic AP ISI Steady state threshold potential (mV) Membrane potential v(t) (mV) 

v bv bv I v Iv(t) v th, ∞

v th            

> Membrane potential v(t) (mV) Time t(ms) Excitatory input frequency fe(Hz) Excitatory input frequency fe(Hz)

No inhibition No inhibition Fig. 3. The inter-spike interval (ISI) noise is larger in neurons with a depolarizing adaptive threshold than those with a fixed threshold. A:The steady state threshold potential as a function of the membrane potential as described in equation (13). B: Trajectories of the depolarizing adaptive threshold and membrane potential as a function of time. The membrane potential (blue line) evolves via (1) and (2) while the threshold potential (black line) evolves via (12) and (13). In these simulations, the postsynaptic neuron only receives excitation (fi = 0) . Once the membrane potential is driven to the threshold potential, the postsynaptic neuron fires an AP (red dot). The inter-spike interval (ISI) is the time interval between successive postsynaptic APs. 

C: A comparison of the mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of the excitatory input frequency for both a fixed threshold and the depolarizing adaptive threshold. D: The ISI noise as a function of the excitatory input frequency for both a fixed threshold and a depolarizing adaptive threshold model. For each value of fe, the mean postsynaptic firing frequencies of the two models were matched by incrementally adjusting the adaptive threshold parameter 

vb until the difference between the mean postsynaptic firing frequencies was within a 10 μHz difference. The excitatory and inhibitory QC for each of these plots is modeled as binomial distributions with means ⟨be⟩ = 1 and noise CV 2 

> be

= 0 .95 . Parameters: τv = 100 ms , τth = 100 ms , vb = 20 mV ,

vmin = −50 mV , vI = 10 mV , aT = 0 .8 mV, c e = 2 mV, v r = 0 mV .

Fig. 3-C plots the mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of fe for both the fixed and depolarizing adaptive threshold models. This figure shows that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency decreases with an adaptive threshold potential, as the threshold increases with excitation. Fig 3-D plots the ISI noise as a function of the excitatory input frequency for both the fixed and depolarizing adaptive threshold models. For each value of fe, the mean postsy-naptic firing frequencies of the two models were matched by incrementally adjusting the adaptive threshold parameter 

vb until the difference between the mean postsynaptic firing frequencies was within a 10 μs difference. The ISI noise peaks at intermediate frequencies for both models, with a larger maximum in the adaptive case due to the variability in-troduced by the changing of both v(t) and vth (t). The results in Fig. 3 are consistent with experimental results showing that dynamic threshold mechanisms contribute substantially to spike-time variability [64]. Having analyzed the ISI statistics for excitation alone, we now include inhibition. Fig. 4-A and Fig. 4-B show the mean postsynaptic firing frequency and ISI noise as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequencies, respectively. Fig. 4-A shows that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency decreases with increasing fi. Fig. 4-B plots the ISI noise as a function of fe and fi. This plot shows that the excitatory-inhibitory input frequency space is partitioned into regions where CV 2 

> T

< 1, CV 2 

> T

= 1, and CV 2 

> T

> 1. Noise is maximized when fe ≈ fi and fe and fi are both large, corresponding to the case where CV 2 

> T

> 1. ISI noise is maximized under these conditions as v(t) increases from the arrival of excitatory presynaptic APs at the same rate that it decreases due to the arrival of inhibitory presynaptic APs. The increase in ISI noise when excitation and inhibition are approximately balanced is consistent with experimental observations [65] of highly irregular cortical firing. For the fixed threshold model, the mean postsynaptic firing frequency and the ISI noise were analyzed for the case of τv → ∞ and τv → 0, and in previous works [59], the case of 0 < τ v < ∞ was analyzed. As variability is now introduced by a changing threshold, we now extend Membrane time constant 𝜏 v (ms) Membrane time constant 𝜏 v (ms) Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) ISI noise 

> 𝜏  th  >𝜏  v
> 𝜏  th  =𝜏  v𝜏  th  <𝜏  v

# Sensitive to 𝜏 th Insensitive to 𝜏 th 

> Inhibitory input frequency  f i (Hz) Threshold time constant  𝜏  th  (ms)

Excitatory input frequency f e (Hz) C DA BExcitatory input frequency f e (Hz) 

# CV T> 1 2CV T = 1 2CV T < 1 2

Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) ISI noise Threshold time constant  𝜏  th  (ms) Inhibitory input frequency  f i (Hz) No firing in black region No firing in black region Fig. 4. The mean postsynaptic firing frequency of a neuron with a depolarizing adaptive threshold increases with excitatory input frequency. A:The mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency. B: The ISI noise as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency. The curved black line represents the excitatory-inhibitory input frequency space where noise, defined by CV 2 

> T

, is 1. The space contained within the curved line has CV 2 

> T

> 1 and CV 2 

> T

< 1 outside of this curved line. C: The mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of the threshold and membrane time constants. The black line shows the mean postsynaptic firing frequency for τth = τv . Above and below the black line shows the mean postsynaptic firing frequency for τth > τ v , and τth < τ v , respectively. D: The ISI noise as a function of the threshold and membrane time constants. The excitatory and inhibitory QC for each of these plots is modeled as binomial distributions with means ⟨be⟩ = 1 and noise CV 2 

> be

= 0 .95 .Parameters: τv = 100 ms , τth = 100 ms , vb = 20 mV , vmin = −50 mV , vI = 10 mV , aT = 0 .8 mV, c e = 2 mV, v r = 0 mV .

this analysis to determine how both τv and τth affect the ISI statistics. Fig. 4-C plots the mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of both the threshold and membrane time constant, and shows that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is insensitive to changes in τth when τth > τ v .Specifically, for a given range of τv where τth > τ v , the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is independent of τth . This occurs because a threshold potential with a large threshold time constant changes so slowly with the membrane potential that it effectively behaves like a fixed threshold. For τth < τ v ,the mean postsynaptic firing frequency becomes sensitive to changes in τth . This occurs because the threshold potential changes quickly with the membrane potential when τth is small. When τth ≈ 0, the threshold potential changes at the same rate as the membrane potential, which prevents postsynaptic firing as no threshold crossings can occur. Fig. 4-D plots the ISI noise as a function of the threshold and membrane potential, and shows that noise is largest for small τv . Additionally, as τv increases, the ISI noise begins to show sensitivity to changes in τth . This occurs because a larger membrane time constant results in v(t)

remaining between vI and vth for longer durations, resulting in a larger increase in vth . Having extended the model by allowing the threshold potential to increase in response to excitatory presynaptic APs, we now explore the case where the threshold potential polarizes in response to inhibitory presynaptic APs. V. E XCITATORY -INHIBITORY NEURONAL EI NETWORK WITH A HYPERPOLARIZING ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD 

In the previous section, we extended the EI model by al-lowing the threshold potential to increase with the membrane potential. This increase models the probabilistic nature of the AMembrane potential v(t) (mV) Steady state threshold potential (mV)  Steady state threshold potential 

v th, ∞

> Threshold limiting potential

v 1

Minimum steady state threshold potential v low 

Base threshold potential 

v b

# BHyperpolarizing adaptive threshold Trajectory simulations, no excitation Threshold limiting potential 

## v 1

> Steady state minimum threshold potential

v low 

Threshold potential v th Base threshold potential v b 

> Postsyn-aptic AP ISI Membrane potential

v(t) 

Time t (ms) Membrane potential (mV) 

# C D

𝜏 v =10 ms 

𝜏 v =10 ms 

𝜏 v =15 ms 

𝜏 v =15 ms 

𝜏 v =20 ms 

𝜏 v =20 ms Inhibitory input frequency f i (Hz) Inhibitory input frequency f i (Hz) Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) ISI noise No excitation No excitation Fig. 5. Presynaptic inhibition can elicit postsynaptic action potentials (APs) when the threshold potential decreases with a hyperpolarizing membrane potential. A: The steady state threshold potential as a function of the membrane potential as in (15). B: Trajectories of the hyperpolarizing adaptive threshold and membrane potential as a function of time. The membrane potential (blue line) evolves via (1) and (2), with fe = 0 , implying that the postsynaptic neuron receives only inhibition. The threshold potential (black line) evolves via (14) and (15). Once the membrane potential is driven to the threshold potential, the postsynaptic neuron fires an AP (red dot). The inter-spike interval (ISI) is the time interval between successive postsynaptic APs. C: The mean postsynaptic firing frequency vs the inhibitory input frequency for τv = 10 ms (blue line), 15 ms (orange line), and 20 ms (green line). The mean postsynaptic firing frequency is maximized at intermediate inhibitory input frequencies, and the maximum value increases with decreasing membrane time constant. D: The ISI noise as a function of the inhibitory input frequency for τv = 10 ms (blue line), 15 ms (orange line), and 20 ms 

(green line). In A − D, the inhibitory QC is modeled as a binomial distribution with mean ⟨bi⟩ = 1 and noise CV 2 

> bi

= 0 .95 . Parameters: τv = 10 ms ,

τth = 20 ms , vb = 20 mV , v1 = −50 mV , vlow = −40 mV , ci = 2 mV, v r = 0 mV .

threshold potential in the presence of excitation. In the ab-sence of excitation, however, inhibitory presynaptic APs have been shown to induce postsynaptic APs [56]. We now allow the threshold potential to decrease with a hyperpolarizing membrane potential, modeling sodium channel [58] recovery from inactivation. We refer to this model as a hyperpolarizing adaptive threshold model. In order to model the observation that inhibition can induce postsynaptic APs, we allow the threshold potential to depend on the membrane potential and evolve via 

dv th 

dt = vth, ∞(v) − vth 

τth 

, (14) as before, where τth is the threshold time constant that controls the rate at which the threshold potential approaches a steady-state level vth, ∞(v). We construct the steady-state threshold level such that the threshold potential behaves as follows: in the case where the membrane potential is at rest (v = vr ), the threshold potential returns to a base value vb

at steady state. But for the hyperpolarized case ( v < v r ), the threshold potential decreases with decreasing v(t) to a steady state low level vlow which occurs when v = v1. We refer to v1 as the threshold limiting potential. Furthermore, it is assumed that v1 < v low , as otherwise postsynaptic APs are always capable of occurring once v < v 1. We modeled the steady state threshold potential described as 

vth, ∞(v) := 



vlow , v < v 1,vlow − v − v1

v1

(vb − vlow ), v1 ≤ v < v r ,vb, v = vr .

(15) Fig. 5-A shows a plot of (15), and Fig. 5-B shows trajectories of the hyperpolarizing threshold potential in (14) and the membrane potential in (1) and (2) as a function of time. In Fig. 5-C, the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is shown as a function of the inhibitory input frequency for three different levels of τv . This figure shows that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is maximized at intermediate inhibitory input frequencies. This occurs for two reasons. First, for sufficiently low fi, the threshold potential never drops below the resting potential, and no threshold crossings can occur. Second, for sufficiently large fi, the membrane potential drops below the steady state minimum threshold potential vlow , again preventing threshold crossings. Further-more, the maximum mean postsynaptic frequency decreases as τv increases. This occurs because a larger τv causes v(t)

to return more slowly to vr , allowing vth more time to return to vb and reducing the number of threshold crossings. Fig. 5-D shows ISI noise, defined by CV 2 

> T

, as a function of fi for the same membrane time constants in Fig. 5-C. From this figure, we can see that noise is minimized at intermediate fi, and the value of fi where this minimum occurs increases with increasing τv . This occurs because the membrane potential returns more quickly to the resting potential with a larger time constant, which increases the chance of a threshold crossing. Having analyzed the ISI statistics in terms of inhibition only, we now explore how the addition of excitation affects the ISI statistics. Fig. 6-A plots the mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of both the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency. This figure shows that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is maximized for low fi and high fe.Additionally, at low values of fe, the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is maximized at intermediate fi, as shown in Fig. 5-C. Fig. 6-B plots the ISI noise as a function of fe

and fi, and shows three things. First, for fi < 80 Hz , the ISI noise is approximately fixed. Second, when fe ≈ 150 Hz ,the ISI noise reaches a minimum value at intermediate fi.And third, for fe > 150 Hz , the ISI noise increases with increasing fi.Having investigated how fe and fi affect the ISI statistics, we now study how τv and τth affect the ISI statistics, as they are important components of the model that govern the timing of threshold crossings. In Fig. 6-C, the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is plotted as a function of the threshold and membrane time constant. Interestingly, the maximum mean postsynaptic firing frequency occurs when both time constants are low and the threshold time constant is slightly larger. This occurs for two reasons. The first is that a large τth slows the rate at which the threshold potential decreases, which leads to longer ISIs. When τth is sufficiently large, vth changes so slowly that it behaves like a fixed threshold, and no postsynaptic APs can occur. Second, when τth is sufficiently small, the threshold potential changes too quickly for threshold crossings to occur. Additionally, if the membrane time constant is too small, the threshold potential remains near its base threshold potential, and no threshold crossings occur. As the threshold time constant becomes too large, the membrane potential decreases without bound, preventing any crossings from occurring. Fig. 6-D shows ISI noise, defined by CV 2 

> T

, as a function of the threshold and membrane time constants. This figure shows that the ISI noise increases for a given τv as τth in-creases. This occurs because the threshold potential changes more slowly, leading to an increased number of threshold crossings at lower membrane time constants. Additionally, the ISI noise is maximized at low values of τv and τth .This maximum randomness at low time constants is due to the fact that both v(t) and vth are changing quickly, which introduces variability into the threshold crossing times. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This paper analyzes the statistics of the inter-spike interval (ISI) for a postsynaptic neuron that independently receives excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic APs (see Fig. 1) for three types of thresholds: a fixed threshold, a threshold poten-tial that increases in response to presynaptic excitation, and a threshold potential that decreases in response to presynaptic inhibition. We refer to this model as the EI model. For the EI model with a fixed threshold, an analytical equation for the mean ISI for the case of τv → ∞ was derived (see Fig. 2-A). Following this, the ISI statistics were discussed for other parameter spaces for a fixed threshold. Next, the threshold potential was allowed to increase in response to presynaptic excitation (see Fig. 2), and we analyzed the mean postsynaptic firing frequency and ISI noise as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequencies and the threshold and membrane time constants. Our results showed that the ISI statistics as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequencies were similar in form to the results of the fixed threshold model. Furthermore, when we analyzed the ISI statistics as a function of the threshold and membrane time constants, our results showed that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency was insensitive to changes in the threshold time constant when it exceeded the membrane time constant (see Fig. 3, Fig. 4). Additionally, the maximum mean firing frequency was shown to increase as both the threshold and membrane time constants increased. ISI noise was shown to exhibit an increased sensitivity to changes in the threshold time constant with increasing membrane time constant. These findings are consistent with experimental observa-tions demonstrating that neuronal spike threshold is dynam-ically modulated by membrane potential and recent activity rather than remaining fixed. In vivo recordings [19] have shown that threshold variability can substantially influence spike timing and coincidence detection. Our results extend this idea by showing that adaptive threshold dynamics can strongly shape inter-spike interval statistics, increasing or de-creasing firing variability depending on the form of threshold adaptation. After this, we allowed the threshold potential to de-crease in response to presynaptic inhibition, modeling postin-hibitory facilitation (see Fig. 5-A). Our results showed that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency is maximized at intermediate inhibitory input frequencies. Subsequently, the Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) ISI noise Maximum No firing in black region Maximum       

> Membrane time constant 𝜏 v(ms) Threshold time constant  𝜏  th  (ms) ISI noise Inhibitory input frequency  f i (Hz) Inhibitory input frequency  f i (Hz) Excitatory input frequency fe(Hz)

## Maximum Maximum Maximimum for a fixed f e at intermediate f i

# A BC D

# CV T = 1 2CV T > 1 2CV T< 1 2      

> Membrane time constant 𝜏 v(ms) Mean postsynaptic firing frequency (Hz) Threshold time constant  𝜏  th  (ms) Excitatory input frequency fe(Hz)

No firing in black region Fig. 6. The mean postsynaptic firing rate of a neuron with a hyperpolarizing adaptive threshold is maximized at intermediate membrane and threshold time constants. A: The mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency. The white line shows the mean postsynaptic firing frequency for fe = 20 Hz , and the white circle on the white line represents the maximum postsynaptic firing frequency occurring at fi = 265 Hz . B: The ISI noise as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequency. The black line represents the parameter space of fe and fi where CV 2 

> T

= 1 . In the space to the left of the black line CV 2 

> T

< 1, and to the right of the black line CV 2 

> T

> 1. C: The mean postsynaptic firing frequency as a function of the threshold and membrane time constant. The mean postsynaptic firing frequency is maximized at intermediate values of the time constants. D: The ISI noise as a function of the threshold and membrane time constants. In A-D, the excitatory and inhibitory QC are modeled as a binomial distribution with means ⟨be⟩ = ⟨bi⟩ = 1 and noise CV 2 

> be

= CV 2 

> bi

= 0 .95 . Parameters: τv = 10 ms , τth = 20 ms , vb = 20 mV ,

v1 = −50 mV , vlow = −40 mV , ci = 2 mV, c e = 2 mV, v r = 0 mV .

mean postsynaptic firing frequency and its noise were studied as a function of the excitatory and inhibitory input frequen-cies. Our analysis showed that the mean postsynaptic firing frequency was maximized at intermediate inhibitory input frequencies at low excitatory input frequencies. Additionally, the ISI noise at high inhibitory input frequencies was shown to either reach a local minimum value or a maximum value, depending on the excitatory input frequency level. In contrast to the case where the threshold potential increased with excitation, the mean postsynaptic firing frequency was shown to be maximized at intermediate values of the threshold and membrane time constant (see Fig. 6-C). ISI noise was shown to decrease with increasing threshold time constant. In future works, the first-passage-time framework will be utilized to derive equations for the ISI statistics for both the fixed and adaptive threshold models, improving the predictive power of the models. Furthermore, the threshold potential in both adaptive models will be changed to nonlin-ear functions, modeling the nonlinear effects of ion channels on the threshold potential [66]. Finally, the model will be extended to study feed-forward and feedback networks. REFERENCES [1] E. R. Kandel, J. H. Schwartz, T. M. Jessell, S. A. Siegelbaum, and A. J. Hudspeth, Principles of Neural Science , 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2021. [2] N. I. M¨ uller, I. Paulußen, L. N. Hofmann, J. O. Fisch, A. Singh, and E. Friauf, “Development of synaptic fidelity and action potential ro-bustness at an inhibitory sound localization circuit: effects of otoferlin-related deafness,” The Journal of Physiology , vol. 600, no. 10, pp. 2461–2497, 2022. [3] S. E. Brill, A. Maraslioglu, C. Kurz, F. Kramer, M. F. Fuhr, A. Singh, and E. Friauf, “Glycinergic transmission in the presence and absence of functional glyt2: Lessons from the auditory brainstem,” Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience , vol. 12, p. 56, 2021. [4] S. E. Brill, K. Janz, A. Singh, and E. Friauf, “Considerable differ-ences between auditory medulla, auditory midbrain, and hippocampal synapses during sustained high-frequency stimulation: Exceptional vesicle replenishment restricted to sound localization circuit,” Hearing research , vol. 381, p. 107771, 2019. [5] Z. Vahdat, K. Nienałtowski, Z. Farooq, M. Komorowski, and A. Singh, “Information processing in unregulated and autoregulated gene expres-sion,” in 2020 European Control Conference (ECC) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 258–263. [6] Z. Vahdat, O. Gambrell, and A. Singh, “Negative feedback regulation via an autapse enhances neuronal firing precision,” in Proceedings of the 2024 American Control Conference (ACC) . IEEE, July 2024, pp. 3941–3946. [7] Z. Vahdat and A. Singh, “Frequency-dependent modulation of stochas-ticity in postsynaptic neuron firing times,” in 2022 IEEE 61st Confer-ence on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2022, pp. 635–640. [8] O. Gambrell, Z. Vahdat, and A. Singh, “Feedforward regulation of interneuronal communication,” in Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) . IEEE, December 2024, pp. 607–612. [9] O. Gambrell and A. Singh, “Consequences of decoy site repair on stochastic fluctuations in neurotransmission,” in 2025 American Control Conference (ACC) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1406–1411. [10] C. Pulido, F. F. Trigo, I. Llano, and A. Marty, “Vesicular release statis-tics and unitary postsynaptic current at single gabaergic synapses,” 

Neuron , vol. 85, pp. 159–172, 2015. [11] G. Malagon, T. Miki, I. Llano, E. Neher, and A. Marty, “Counting vesicular release events reveals binomial release statistics at single glutamatergic synapses,” Journal of Neuroscience , vol. 36, no. 14, pp. 4010–4025, Apr 6 2016. [12] K. Rijal, N. I. M¨ uller, E. Friauf, A. Singh, A. Prasad, and D. Das, “Exact distribution of the quantal content in synaptic transmission,” 

Physical Review Letters , vol. 132, no. 22, p. 228401, 2024. [13] O. Bykowska, C. Gontier, A.-L. Sax, D. W. Jia, M. L. Montero, A. D. Bird, and et al., “Model-based inference of synaptic transmission,” 

Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience , vol. 11, p. 21, 2019. [14] M. V. Tsodyks and H. Markram, “The neural code between neocortical pyramidal neurons depends on neurotransmitter release probability,” 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA , vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 719–723, 1997. [15] A. Barri, Y. Wang, D. Hansel, and G. Mongillo, “Quantifying repetitive transmission at chemical synapses: a generative-model approach,” 

eNeuro , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. ENEURO.0113–15.2016, 2016. [16] G. Fuhrmann, I. Segev, H. Markram, and M. Tsodyks, “Coding of temporal information by activity-dependent synapses,” Journal of Neurophysiology , vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 140–148, 2002. [17] J. de la Rocha and N. Parga, “Short-term synaptic depression causes a non-monotonic response to correlated stimuli,” Journal of Neuro-science , vol. 25, no. 37, pp. 8416–8431, 2005. [18] Z. Vahdat, O. Gambrell, J. Fisch, E. Friauf, and A. Singh, “Inferring synaptic transmission from the stochastic dynamics of the quantal con-tent: An analytical approach,” PLOS Computational Biology , vol. 21, no. 5, p. e1013067, 2025. [19] R. Azouz and C. M. Gray, “Dynamic spike threshold reveals amechanism for synaptic coincidence detection in cortical neurons in vivo,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 97, no. 14, pp. 8110–8115, 2000. [20] R. Kobayashi and K. Kitano, “Impact of slow k+ currents on spike generation can be described by an adaptive threshold model,” Journal of Computational Neuroscience , vol. 40, p. 347–362, 2016. [21] S. T. Lubejko, B. Fontaine, S. E. Soueidan, and K. M. MacLeod, “Spike threshold adaptation diversifies neuronal operating modes in the auditory brain stem,” Journal of Neurophysiology , vol. 122, no. 6, pp. 2576–2590, Dec. 2019. [22] A. Marasco, E. Spera, V. De Falco et al. , “An adaptive generalized leaky integrate-and-fire model for hippocampal ca1 pyramidal neurons and interneurons,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , vol. 85, no. 109, 2023. [23] C. Huang, A. Resnik, T. Celikel, and B. Englitz, “Adaptive spike threshold enables robust and temporally precise neuronal encoding,” 

PLOS Computational Biology , vol. 12, no. 6, 2016. [24] S. Levy and C. I. Bargmann, “An adaptive-threshold mechanism for odor sensation and animal navigation,” Neuron , vol. 105, no. 3, pp. 534–548.e13, 2020. [25] E. Crocco, L. Iannello, F. Tonelli, G. Lagani, L. Pandolfini, M. Ferro, G. Amato, A. Di Garbo, and F. Cremisi, “A proper excita-tory/inhibitory ratio is required to develop synchronized network activity in mouse cortical cultures,” Stem Cell Reports , vol. 20, no. 10, p. 102646, 2025. [26] A. Alizadeh, B. Englitz, and F. Zeldenrust, “How the layer-dependent ratio of excitatory to inhibitory cells shapes cortical coding in balanced networks,” eLife , vol. 14, p. RP105162, 2025. [27] R. Cohen Kadosh, “Rethinking excitation/inhibition balance in the human brain,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience , vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 451– 452, 2025. [28] G. Barzon, D. M. Busiello, and G. Nicoletti, “Excitation-inhibition balance controls information encoding in neural populations,” Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 134, p. 068403, Feb 2025. [29] K. Chakravarty, S. Roy, A. Sinha, and A. Kumar, “Can we infer excitation-inhibition balance from the spectrum of population activ-ity?” Communications Biology , vol. 9, no. 1, p. 51, 2025. [30] S. Sadeh and C. Clopath, “Excitatory-inhibitory balance modulates the formation and dynamics of neuronal assemblies in cortical networks,” 

Science Advances , vol. 7, no. 45, p. eabg8411, 2021. [31] S. Rich, M. Zochowski, and V. Booth, “Effects of neuromodulation on excitatory–inhibitory neural network dynamics depend on network connectivity structure,” Journal of Nonlinear Science , vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 2171–2194, 2020. [32] E. Dzyubenko, M. Fleischer, D. Manrique-Castano, M. Borbor, C. Kleinschnitz, A. Faissner, and D. M. Hermann, “Inhibitory control in neuronal networks relies on the extracellular matrix integrity,” 

Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences , vol. 78, no. 14, pp. 5647–5663, 2021. [33] A. D. Reyes, “Computing the effects of excitatory-inhibitory balance on neuronal input-output properties,” PLOS Computational Biology ,vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1–22, Mar. 2026. [34] K. R. Ghusinga, J. J. Dennehy, and A. Singh, “First-passage time approach to controlling noise in the timing of intracellular events,” 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 114, pp. 693– 698, 2017. [35] A. Marantan and A. Amir, “Stochastic modeling of cell growth with symmetric or asymmetric division,” Physical Review E , vol. 94, p. 012405, 2016. [36] K. R. Ghusinga, C. A. Vargas-Garcia, and A. Singh, “A mechanistic stochastic framework for regulating bacterial cell division,” Scientific Reports , p. 30229, 2016. [37] A. D. Co, M. C. Lagomarsino, M. Caselle, and M. Osella, “Stochastic timing in gene expression for simple regulatory strategies,” Nucleic Acids Research , vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 1069–1078, 2017. [38] K. Biswas and A. Ghosh, “First passage time in post-transcriptional regulation by multiple small rnas,” European Physical Journal E ,vol. 44, no. 2, p. 16, 2021. [39] L. Ham, M. A. Coomer, K. ¨Ocal, R. Grima, and M. P. H. Stumpf, “A stochastic vs deterministic perspective on the timing of cellular events,” Nature Communications , vol. 15, p. 5286, 2024. [40] M. Z. Ali and R. C. Brewster, “Controlling gene expression timing through gene regulatory architecture,” PLOS Computational Biology ,vol. 18, no. 1, p. e1009745, 2022. [41] S. Gupta, J. Varennes, H. C. Korswagen, and A. Mugler, “Temporal precision of regulated gene expression,” PLOS Computational Biology ,vol. 14, no. 6, 2018. [42] K. Biswas, S. Dey, and A. Singh, “Sequestration of gene products by decoys enhances precision in the timing of intracellular events,” 

Scientific Reports , vol. 14, no. 1, p. 27199, 2024. [43] S. Dey, S. Kannoly, P. Bokes, J. J. Dennehy, and A. Singh, “Feedfor-ward genetic circuits regulate the precision of event timing,” in 2021 European Control Conference (ECC) , 2021, pp. 2127–2132. [44] Z. Vahdat, K. R. Ghusinga, and A. Singh, “Comparing feedback strategies for minimizing noise in gene expression event timing,” in 2021 29th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED) , 2021, pp. 450–455. [45] S. Kannoly, K. Singh, N. Juman, Z. M. Islam, I. C. Quiroga, A. Singh, and J. J. Dennehy, “Translation efficiency impacts phage lysis timing and its precision in single cells,” bioRxiv , 2025. [46] S. Kannoly, A. Singh, and J. J. Dennehy, “An optimal lysis time maximizes bacteriophage fitness in quasi-continuous culture,” mBio ,vol. 13, no. 3, pp. e03 593–21, 2022. [47] A. Singh and J. J. Dennehy, “Stochastic holin expression can account for lysis time variation in the bacteriophage lambda,” Journal of The Royal Society Interface , vol. 11, no. 95, p. 20140140, 2014. [48] A. Mondal, H. Teimouri, and A. B. Kolomeisky, “Molecular mecha-nisms of precise timing in cell lysis,” Biophysical Journal , vol. 123, no. 18, pp. 3090–3099, 2024. [49] K. R. Ghusinga, C. A. Vargas-Garcia, and A. Singh, “A mechanistic stochastic framework for regulating bacterial cell division,” Scientific Reports , vol. 6, 2016. [50] K. R. Ghusinga and A. Singh, “Effect of gene-expression bursts on stochastic timing of cellular events,” in 2017 American Control Conference (ACC) , 2017, pp. 2118–2123. [51] O. Gambrell and A. Singh, “Analysis of neuronal firing in stochastic models with adaptive thresholds,” in 2025 European Control Confer-ence (ECC) , 2025, pp. 582–587. [52] R. Brette and W. Gerstner, “Adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire model as an effective description of neuronal activity,” Journal of Neurophysiology , 2005, pMID: 16014787. [53] Y. H. Liu and X.-J. Wang, “Spike-frequency adaptation of a general-ized leaky integrate-and-fire model neuron,” Journal of Computational Neuroscience , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 25–45, Jan 2001. [54] R. Orfali and N. Albanyan, “Ca 2+ -sensitive potassium channels,” 

Molecules (Basel, Switzerland) , vol. 28, no. 2, p. 885, 2023. [55] G. E. Ha and E. Cheong, “Spike frequency adaptation in neurons of the central nervous system,” Experimental Neurobiology , vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 179–185, 2017. [56] A. A. Mahrous, M. K. Chardon, M. D. Johnson, J. F. Miller, and C. Heckman, “Post-inhibitory rebound excitation drives extensor ac-tivity following spinal cord stimulation,” Brain Stimulation , vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1906–1917, 2025. [57] L. Schmid, T. Klotz, O. R¨ ohrle, R. K. Powers, F. Negro, and U. S ¸ . Yavuz, “Postinhibitory excitation in motoneurons can be facilitated by hyperpolarization-activated inward currents: A simulation study,” 

PLoS Computational Biology , vol. 20, no. 1, p. e1011487, Jan. 2024. [58] B. P. Bean, “The action potential in mammalian central neurons,” 

Nature Reviews Neuroscience , vol. 8, pp. 451–465, 2007. [59] O. Gambrell Jr. and A. Singh, “Postsynaptic integration of excitatory and inhibitory signals based on an adaptive firing threshold,” bioRxiv ,2026, preprint, posted March 26, 2026. [60] O. Gambrell and A. Singh, “Systems level analysis of action potential firing in neuronal networks,” may 2025, preprint. [61] C. Vergara, R. Latorre, N. V. Marrion, and J. P. Adelman, “Calcium-activated potassium channels,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology ,vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 321–329, 1998. [62] J. Platkiewicz and R. Brette, “Impact of fast sodium channel inacti-vation on spike threshold dynamics and synaptic integration,” PLoS Computational Biology , vol. 7, no. 5, p. e1001129, 2011. [63] S. T. Lubejko, B. Fontaine, S. E. Soueidan, and K. M. MacLeod, “Spike threshold adaptation diversifies neuronal operating modes in the auditory brain stem,” Journal of Neurophysiology , vol. 122, no. 6, pp. 2576–2590, 2019. [64] L. Badel, S. Lefort, R. Brette, C. C. H. Petersen, W. Gerstner, and M. J. E. Richardson, “Dynamic i-v curves are reliable predictors of naturalistic pyramidal-neuron voltage traces,” Journal of Neurophysi-ology , vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 656–666, 2008. [65] W. R. Softky and C. Koch, “The highly irregular firing of cortical cells is inconsistent with temporal integration of random epsps,” Journal of Neuroscience , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 334–350, 1993. [66] R. Brette and W. Gerstner, “Adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire model as an effective description of neuronal activity,” Journal of Neurophysiology , vol. 94, pp. 3637–3642, 2005.