Title: Parvalbumin and somatostatin inhibitory microcircuits perform distinct roles in stereo matching

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
1

# Title: Parvalbumin and somatostatin inhibitory 

# microcircuits perform distinct roles in stereo matching 

Mandi C Severson 1,2,3† , Jason M Samonds 1,2,3 *† , Carrie Barr 1,2,3 , Nicholas J Priebe 1,2,3 

> 1

Center for Learning and Memory, 2Center for Perceptual Systems, 3Department of 

Neuroscience, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX USA  

> †

These authors contributed equally. 

* Correspondence should be addressed to J.M.S. (samondjm@gmail.com) 

Number of figures: 7 

Abstract: 225 words 

Introduction: 658 words 

Discussion: 1032 words 

Acknowledgments 

We are grateful to Boris Zemelman for providing the equipment needed and viruses 

neces sary to carry out the optogenetic experiments. We thank Stefanie Esmond , Ronan 

O’Shea, Vy Nguyen, and Mason Antin for providing technical assistance. 

There are no conflicts of interest. 

Funding 

Supported by National Health Institutes Grants EY034092 (J.M.S.) , EY025102 (N.J.P.) 

and T32 -EY021462 -12 (M.C.S). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

## Abstract 

We readily perceive stereoscopic depth in correlated random dot stereograms (RDS), in 

which every dot presented to one eye has a matching dot in the other eye. In contrast, anti -

correlated RDS, in which corresponding dots have opposite contrast polarity be tween the 

two eyes, do not evoke a perception of depth. Nevertheless, anti -correlated RDS still 

generate local same -polarity matches within the receptive fields of individual neurons. 

Inhibitory circuitry has been proposed to suppress these false matches a nd thereby prevent 

the perception of illusory depth. To investigate how inhibitory circuits in visual cortex 

contribute to this process, we measured disparity selectivity to correlated and anti -

correlated RDS in two major classes of inhibitory neurons in m ice: parvalbumin -expressing 

(PV+) and somatostatin -expressing (SST+) neurons. We found that the disparity tuning of 

PV+ neurons was highly correlated with the average activity of surrounding neurons. In 

contrast, the disparity tuning of SST+ neurons was po orly predicted by local population 

activity, suggesting that PV+ and SST+ neurons integrate excitatory inputs through distinct 

mechanisms. Optogenetic suppression of PV+ or SST+ neurons further revealed divergent 

functional roles. Although both cell types contributed to sharpening selectivity for 

correlated RDS, only SST+ neurons reduced selectivity for anti -correlated RDS. These 

findings suggest that PV+ and SST+ circuits both enhance responses to correct bino cular 

matches in correlated RDS , whereas SST+ c ircuits contribute to suppressing false matches 

in anti -correlated RDS .

## Introduction 

Depth can be computed from d isparities between the left and right retinotopic projections ,

but the brain must determine which points from one retinal image correspond to the same 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

physical points in the other retinal image, known as the stereo correspondence problem .

One fundamental challenge of this computation is that there are many potential 

interpretations, and yet we infer depth from stereo information seamlessly. Ide ntifying false 

matches, or the incorrect matching of features from the left and right eyes , is a key strategy 

to limit the set of plausible interpretations .

Our understanding of binocular integration in the primary visual cortex (V1) has 

been guided by the disparity energy model (Ohzawa et al., 1990) . In this model, binocular 

signals are initially combined by polarity -sensitive sim ple cells, which converge onto 

complex cells that encode disparity independent of polarity. To avoid potential monocular 

artifacts, experimentalists use random dot stereograms (RDS) to measure neural responses 

to disparity. In RDS, changes in disparity are not associated with discernible changes in 

monocular images (Julesz, 1969) . The disparity energy model does well at explaining 

disparity tuning to RDS for complex cells in V1 (Prince et al., 2002a; Prince et al., 2002b) .

Because the disparity information is initially generated by polarity sensitive simple cells, 

the energy model predicts that disparity tuning to stereo matches of opposite polarity 

(matching black with white dots or “anti -correlated RDS”) are inverted relative to 

“correlated” RDS. Anti -correlated RDS generally do not produce the perception of depth 

like stand ard correlated RDS (Julesz, 1969; Julesz and Tyler, 1976; Cogan et al., 1993; 

Cumming et al., 1998; Hibbard et al., 2014) , though neurons in the primary visual cortex 

(V1) respond to anti -correlated RDS in a way similar as the model (Cumming and Parker, 

1997; Ohzawa et al., 1997; Lippert and Wagner, 2001; Nieder and Wagner, 2001; Samonds 

et al., 2013; La Chioma et al., 2020) . The peaks in an anti -correlated RDS disparity tuning 

curve represen t local false matches. Therefore, i t is possible to probe the responses to false 

matches by presenting anti -correlated RDS, thus offering a method to examine how the 

visual system rejects these matches. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

One important difference between the disparity energy model’s predictions and 

neurophysiological data is that the magnitude of disparity induced modulation is smaller 

for anti -correlated than correlated RDS (Cumming and Parker, 1997; Ohzawa et al. , 1997) .

The disparity energy model predicts that these would be the same magnitude (Ohzawa et 

al., 1990) . This suggests tha t V1 is at least partially solving the stereo corresponde nce 

problem and represents an intermediate stage in the process of suppressing false matches 

in anti -correlated RDS (Samonds et al., 2013) .

Several hypotheses have been proposed about how the populations of neurons in 

the visual cortex could suppress false matches. First, coarse -to -fine processing of disparity, 

with coarse processing preceding and constraining fine proces sing (Menz and Freeman, 

2003; Chen and Qian, 2004) . Second, recurrent interactions (both suppressive and 

facilitative) among disparity -tuned neurons could refine disparity tuning (Samonds et al., 

2009; Samonds et al., 2013) . Third, phase -disparity neurons could act as “lie detectors” to 

signal false matches (Rea d and Cumming, 2007) . Fourth, the alignment of receptive fields 

in V1 in a push -pull manner could reduce the response to false matches (Tanabe et al., 

2011) . Lastly, thresholding could effectively suppress false matches (Lippert and Wagner, 

2001) . One common element in many of these hypotheses is that they predict that inhibitory 

neurons would play a significant role in suppressing false matches. 

To ascertain how cortical inhibitory neurons might contribute to solving the stereo 

correspondence problem, we measured disparity selectivity of two major subclasses of 

inhibitory neurons, parvalbumin -expres sing (PV+) and somatostatin -expressing (SST+) in 

mouse binocular visual cortex . We also measured the impact of suppressing each of the 

inhibitory cell classes on the disparity selective responses of the remaining neuronal 

population. Our results demonstra te that both PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons enhance 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

correct matches in correlated RDS, but only SST+ neurons appear to play a role in 

suppressing false matches that occur in anti -correlated RDS. 

## Materials and Methods 

Preparation of animals 

The Universit y of Texas at Austin Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved 

all procedures, and they are in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for 

the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. For imaging, w e crossed tetO -GCaMP6s mice 

(Jackson Labs, # 024742) with CamKII -tTA mice (Jackson Labs, # 007004) to express the 

GCaMP6s calcium indicator in excitatory neurons in 10 mice (3 females, 7 males) 

(Wekselblatt et al., 2016) . We additionally imaged 3 GCaMP -Thy1 animals (2 females, 1 

male) (Jackson Labs, # 025393), which express GCaMP6f in excitatory neurons under the 

Thy1 promoter (Dana et al., 2014) . To identify inhibitory neurons, we used 3 PV -Ai14 and 

10 PV -Cre mice (8 females, 5 males) (Scholl et al., 2015) and 13 SST -Cre mice (7 females, 

6 males) (Lovett -Barron et al., 2014) . For the optogenetics experiments, we used an 

additional 9 PV -Cre (5 females, 4 males), 8 SST -Cre (2 females, 6 males), and 2 GCaMP6s 

(2 males) mice. For each set of experiments, mice were imaged using two -phot on 

microscopy when they were between 3 -7 months of age. 

In preparation for two -photon microscopy experiments, a titanium bar was secured 

to the skull using dental acrylic as described previously (Samonds et al., 2019) . Anim als 

were anesthetized during this procedure using isoflurane anesthesia (1 -3%). After titanium 

head bars were placed, a 3 or 4 mm craniotomy was made over the binocular region of V1 

and a glass window was placed over top and secured with cyanoacrylate. If the animals 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

were PV -Cre or SST -Cre, they also received adeno -associate virus (AAV) injection s before 

the cranial window was placed. 

Viral mixes were chosen to express GCaMP6 f in all neurons (hSYNCMV 

GCamp6f TPI I6 AAV) and TdTomato in neurons expressing Cre -recombinase, eithe r PV+ 

or SST+ neurons (mSYN -422 CMV tetO(4) nls -tdTomato (lox) AAV). Viral mixes for the 

optogenetics experiments also included Archaerhodopsin -T (Arch -T) to express in neurons 

with Cre -recombinase (h56D CMV tetO(4) ArchT tomato targeting (lox) AAV). Mice 

were anesthetized with inhaled isoflurane (1% –3% in oxygen), and body temperature was 

maintained at 37  C. Injections were performed using a stereotaxic apparatus (Sutter 

Instruments and Schaublin) f itted with a Nanoject II microinjector (Drummond Scienti fic 

and World Precision Instruments). Pulled -glass pipettes back -filled with mineral oil were 

used to deposit virus mixes. 75 nL virus was deposited in each site in three 25 -nl pulses. 

There were 10 -15 injection sites per animal. Animals were given 4 weeks for the virus to 

fully express before imaging. 

Retinotopic mapping 

Fluorescence was measured optically across the entire imaging window using the 

previously described intrinsic imaging and stimulation setup (Kalatsk y and Stryker, 2003; 

Nauhaus and Ringach, 2007; Garrett et al., 2014) . Mice were head -fixed on a custom stand 

and lightly anesthetized with 0.5% isoflurane, and silicone oil was applied to their eyes. A 

contrasting checkered bar was used as a visual stimulus, presented for twelve trials and 

alternating randomly between the four cardinal directions. Stimuli were projected onto a 

64 x 46 -cm screen, placed at a 30 -degree angle, 10 cm from and centered on the right eye, 

using an LC4500 -UV projector (Keynotes Photonics). A pco.panda 4.2 sCOMAS camera 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

(Excelitas) equipped with a 2 5 mm C VIS -NIR fixed focal length lens (Edmond Optics) 

and a 525 nm fluorescence filter (Thor Labs) was used for imaging. For illumination, an 

XCite 110 LED illuminator (Excelitas) with a 460 nm filter (Thor Labs) was used. External 

light was blocked betwe en the imaging window and the lens with clay. Using the 

retinotopic maps obtained from these experiments, we targeted binocular visual cortex in 

the center of the visual field. 

Two -photon microscopy 

We measured changes in fluorescence from the calcium indicator GCaMP6s, which was 

expressed in excitatory neurons of CamKII -tTA/tetO -GCaMP6s mice (Wekselblatt et al., 

2016) . Our methods were similar to those previously described (Samonds et al., 2019) . We 

presented 6 -second dynamic random dot stereograms (DRDS; 6 Hz, 7.4° dots, 200 black 

and 200 white dots) interleaved with 6 -second periods of a mean gray screen. A circular 

polarization alternator (Dep thQ/Lightspeed Design) was synchronized with an Optoma 

HD27 projector (120 Hz refresh rate) to rear -project images onto an RP3D polarization -

preserving screen (Severtson Screens) placed 22 cm from the mouse. Stereoscopic depth 

was created by shifting dots to each eye every other frame, with passive circular 

polarization filters placed in front of the mouse's eyes. The dynamic random dot 

stereograms ( DRDS ) were 70° wide and 100° high, and binocular disparity was varied at 

0°, ±1.85°, ±5.55°, and ±9.20° withi n the vertical central 65% of the display, while 

remaining at 0° on the sides. Ten different DRDS were used for each disparity. For anti -

correlated DRDS, each black dot in one eye was matched with a white dot and vice versa. 

Imaging was performed using a c ustom -built two -photon resonant mirror scanning 

microscope with a mode -locked 920 -nm Chameleon Ultra Ti:Sapphire laser (Coherent 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Technologies) (Scholl et al., 2015) . A 16× water objective (0.8 numerical aperture; Nikon) 

focused green light, collected from a 0.4 to 0.5 mm -square region by photomultiplier tubes. 

Images (256 × 455 pixels) were acquired at a frame rate of 30.9 Hz using custom software 

(Labview; National In struments), with focal planes ranging from 130 to 200 μm below the 

cortical surface. The objective was oriented normal to the cortical surface, and clay was 

used to block external light. During imaging, we also tracked the pupils of both eyes using 

a previ ously described method (Samonds et al., 2018; Samonds et al., 2019; Brown et al., 

2025) . Two infrared cameras ( 30 frames per second) were mounted perpendicular to each 

orbital axis while the mouse was head -fixed and running on a floating trackball (Dombeck 

et al., 2007) . Pupil position was tracked using DeepLabCut, and calibrated to degrees of 

vi sual angle based on a similarly sized artificial eyeball with known rotations. 

Two -photon data analysis 

We analyzed images using custom Matlab software. Initially, we bandpass filtered the 

images over time by applying an 8 -frame moving average and subtra cting a 1000 -frame 

median filter. Neurons were manually identified in images and video based on changes in 

brightness, size, and shape. We drew masks around identified neurons, discarding any 

overlapping regions. The neuropil was defined as all pixels outs ide these masks. For each 

neuronal mask, a neuropil annulus was created, 4 pixels wide and 3 pixels away along the 

455 -pixel dimension, and 2 pixels wide and 2 pixels away along the 256 -pixel dimension, 

with any overlap with other masks discarded. We then computed the mean brightness of 

pixels within each mask, the neuropil, and neuropil annuli. To derive ΔF, we subtracted 

the average intensity calculated 4 seconds before all stimuli from these values. We then 

divided these differences by the median intensity over the entire experiment to obtain ΔF/F. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

For masks, we further subtracted the corresponding neuropil annulus value for a

final neuropil -corrected ΔF/F. 

Visually responsive neurons were identified as those with a significantly greater 

average r esponse during the 6 -second stimulus period compared to the 4 seconds pre -

stimulus (sign test, p < 0.05, n = 70 trials). Disparity -tuned neurons showed a significantly 

different average response with respect to disparity (Kruskal -Wallis test, p < 0.05, n =

10 trials, 7 disparities). The disparity selectivity index (DSI) was calculated using the 

resultant vector (Ringach et al., 2002) :

# 𝐷𝑆𝐼 = Σ𝑘 𝑟 𝑘 𝑒 𝑖 2∗𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑘 

Σ𝑘 𝑟 𝑘 

(1) 

Here, rk represents the response to each disparity. We assumed tested disparities wrapped 

around at their extremes for this circular calculation. DSI is 0 if all responses are equal and 

1 if a neu ron responds to only a single disparity. We fit a Gabor function to the average 

responses f across the 7 disparities d, but this fit was not used for analysis :

𝑓 (𝑑 ) = 𝑅 + 𝐴𝑒 −(𝑑 −𝑑 0)2 

> 2𝜎 2

sin ((𝑑 − 𝑑 0)𝑓 + 𝜑 ) (2) 

Pear son’s correlation was compute d between the 7 mean disparity responses to 

correlated and anti -correlated RDS (r correlated -anti -correlated ). Similarly, we used Pearson’s 

correlation to compute the correlation between disparity tuning to correlated or anti -

co rrelated RDS for a single neuron and the average tuning for all significant visually 

responsive neurons within a radius of 125 μm of that neuron. The average tuning for the 

surround population was computed by first normalizing each tuning curve by the aver age 

preferred disparity response to correlated RDS. We only included neurons with at least 5 

surrounding visually responsive neurons. We also used Pearson’s correlation to compute 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

signal correlation using the 7 mean disparity responses for a pair of neuro ns . And finally, 

we used Pearson’s correlation to compute the noise correlation between a pair of neurons. 

To compute noise correlation, we used all 70 paired responses and z -scored each 

response based on the mean and standard deviation of the 10 responses to each of the 7 

disparities. 

Optogenetics 

We used a light -emitting diode (LED ) (CoolLED) delivering 59 0 nm light routed through 

the objective to induce optogenetic suppression of PV+ or SST+ neurons. In order to reduce 

bleedthrough, we added a pi cell liquid crystal shutter with a compensating polarizer 

(Bolder Vision Optik) in front of the photomultiplier tube ( PMT ). The LED was 

synchronized with the pi cell and only delivered light when the shutter was closed. Analysis 

was performed on the frames in which the shutter was open and LED was off. LED power 

was calibrated by measuring it at the objective. The L ED was turned on 2 s before stimulus 

offset and turned off 0.5 s after stimulus offset. Neurons with a significant decrease (t -test, 

p < 0.05) in response when the LED was on in the 2 seconds before stimulus onset were 

classified as PV+ or SST+ and all oth er neurons were classified as PV - or SST -.

Statistics 

All statistical analyses were performed using Matlab, with specific test details provided in 

the relevant figure legends. While we did not use a formal power analysis to determine 

sample size, our numb ers of animals, trials, and neurons are comparable to or larger than 

those in previous studies (Scholl et al., 2015; Samonds et al., 2019) . Data collection and 

analysis were not blinded to subject conditions. No assumptions were made about the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

underlying distributions and a ll statistical tests for behavioral and neuronal data were non -

parametric, including Kruskal -Wallis, Wilcoxon rank -sum, and sign tests. 

## Results 

We examined the roles of two inhibitory cell classes, PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons, 

in processing binocular information in V1 . Both the inputs of these inhibitory cells and 

their targets differ: PV+ inhibitory neurons receive strong feedforward excitato ry input 

from layer 4 and recurrent connections from layer 2/3, while excitatory input to SST+ 

inhibitory neurons comes mainly from layer 2/3 (Dantzker and Callaway, 2000; Xu and 

Callaway, 2009; Adesnik et al., 2012) ; PV+ inhibitory neurons are known to synapse onto 

the cell bodies of excitatory neurons (Jones and Hendry, 1984) , while SST+ inhibitory 

neurons target the dendrites (Kawaguchi and Kubota, 1997; Wang et al., 2004; Xu and 

Calla way, 2009) . The differences suggest that these cell classes could play distinct roles in 

shaping responses to correlated and anti -correlated RDS . We first examined the disparity 

sensiti vity of excitatory neurons before measuring and manipulating these inhibitory cell 

classes. 

Excitatory neurons in mice respond to disparity in anti -correlated RDS 

Similar to macaques (Prince et al., 2002a; Prince et al., 2002b) and cats (Ohzaw a et al., 

1990; Deangelis et al., 1991; Ohzawa et al., 1997) , mice have disparity -tuned neurons in 

V1 to RDS with responses that are well described by Gabor functions, albeit for much 

larger disparities (La Chioma et al., 2019; Samonds et al., 2019) . As the disparity energy 

model predicts (Ohzawa et al., 1990; Cumming and Parker, 1997) , binocular neurons in 

mouse V1 also respond to anti -correlated RDS with responses described well by a Gabor 

function that are on average 180 degrees o ut of phase with respect to correlated RDS (La 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Chioma et al., 2020) . Similar to macaques (Cumming and Parker, 1997) , the disparity 

amplitude modulation (th e maximum – minimum response) for anti -correlated RDS for 

mice is smaller than predicted by the disparity energy model (La Chioma et al., 2020) .

We used two -photon microscopy to measure visually -evoked responses in 

transgenic mice that express G CaMP 6s in excitatory neurons (Wekselblatt et al., 2016) .

Within the box ( Figure 1A), we show a representative example of the significant visually -

responsive (gray) and disparity -tuned neurons (black) . These include neurons that 

respond ed most to crossed disparities project ed in front of our screen ( Figure 1B, “tuned 

near” or rendered depths less than 22 cm), most to zero disparities ( Figure 1B, “tuned zero” 

or rendered depths near 22 cm), and most to uncrossed disparities project ed behind our 

screen ( Figure 1B, “tuned far” or rendered depths greater than 22 cm). The solid black 

points and lines represent disparity -dependent responses to correlated RDS and the open 

circles and dashed lines represent disparity -dependent responses to anti -correlated RDS 

(Figure 1B). The tuning to anti -correlated RDS wa s generally 180 degrees o ut of phase (or 

inverted) and ha d smaller amplitude modulation compared to correlated RDS in many of 

these examples. Similarly, across all our data, the distribution of the correlation between 

correlated and anti -correlated RDS t uning curves wa s skewed tow ards negative one and 

consistently below zero for individual mice , suggesting that it wa s generally inverted 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

(Figure 1C) . M ost response amplitude modulations for neurons f ell below the principal 

diagonal and the amplitude modulation ratio (AMR , amplitude modulation for anti -

correlated RDS divided by amplitude modulation for correlated RDS ) wa s consistently 

Figure 1. Disparity tuning to anti -correlated stereograms is inverted and has weaker 

modulation with respect to correlated stereograms. 

A, Responses of excitatory neurons in transgenic mice expressing GCAMP6s were measured 

with two -photon microscopy. First, neurons were identified with significant visual responses (sign 

test, p < 0.05, n = 70 trials) and significant disparity tuning (Kruskal -Wallis test, p < 0.05, n = 10 

trials, 7 disparities). 

B, Examples of disparity tuning to correlated (corr) dynamic random dot stereograms (DRDS) 

and anti -correlated (anticorr) DRDS fit with Gabor functions. Error bars are standard error. 

C, The correlatio n between corr and anticorr disparity tuning was significantly negative across 

mice (Wilcoxon signed rank test, p = 0.003) and all neurons (Wilcoxon signed rank test, p <

0.001), suggesting that anticorr tuning is inverted with respect to corr disparity tu ning. Area of 

circles for individual mice represent the number of neurons. 

D, The modulation (maximum -minimum response) for anticorr disparity tuning was significantly 

smaller than for corr disparity tuning across mice (Wilcoxon signed rank test, p < 0.001 ) and all 

neurons (Wilcoxon signed rank test, p < 0.001). The amplitude modulation ratio for individual 

mice is anticorr modulation divided by corr modulation. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

below one for individual mice (Figure 1D). These results are consistent with those 

measured by La Chioma et al. (2020) and similar to what we observe when we applied the 

same metrics to electrophysiological spike rates measured from V1 neurons in the macaque 

(Figure S1; Samonds et al. 2013) . These data show that false match responses to anti -

corr elated RDS are partially suppressed in mouse visual cortex with a magnitude similar 

to V1 in non -human primates. 

How inhibitory neurons cou ld suppress responses to false matches 

One potential mechanism for selectively suppressing responses to false match es is for 

inhibitory neurons to integrate excitatory responses in a disparity -dependent manner . When 

neurons are aligned by their preferred disparity or peak response to correlated RDS , the 

peaks of their responses to anti -correlated RDS do not align (Samonds et al., 2013) . We 

illustrate this using four example excitatory neurons from Figure 1A. Aligning disparity -

tuned excitatory neurons with a preferred disparity of –5.5° reveals consistent tuning to 

correlated RDS (Figure 2A, left), whereas their pref erred disparities for anti -correlated 

RDS are scattered (Figure 2A, right). To quantify this effect, we aligned all 700 excitatory 

neurons by their preferred disparity and normalized each neuron by its response at the 

preferred disparity. Averaging across the population produced a much flatter tuning curve 

for anti -correlated RDS than for correlated RDS (Figure 2B), resulting in an AMR 

substantially smaller than what we observed in individual neurons (Figure 1D). Thus, 

selective integration based on correla ted -RDS disparity on average reduces the magnitude 

of the negative correlation (inversion ) between correlated and anti -correlated tuning and 

attenuates disparity -dependent modulation to anti -correlated stimuli. If inhibitory neurons 

selectively integrate e xcitatory inputs with similar disparity preferences, they would reduce 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

modulation to false matches in their responses and could in turn suppress excitatory 

responses to false matches in anti -correlated RDS. 

Because disparity is represented heterogeneously in mouse visual cortex, the 

disparity selectiv ity of inhibitory neurons provides insight into how they integrate 

excitatory inputs (Scholl et al., 2015) . An inhibitory neuron that pools indiscriminately 

from local excitatory neurons would be expected to exhibit weak or flat disparity tuning. 

However, the coarse organization of pref erred disparity in mouse visual cortex (La Chioma 

et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2025) creates local biases that produce broad tuning reflecting 

Figure 2. Potential mechanisms of suppressing false matches with inhibitory neurons .

A, Four example excitatory neurons with similar disparity tuning to correlated RDS (left) and their 

corresponding disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS (right). 

B, Population average of normalized tunin g curves for correlated and anti -correlated RDS both 

aligned to the preferred disparity to correlated RDS. 

C, Predicted disparity tuning curve for an inhibitory neuron that non -selectively integrates from 

surrounding excitatory neurons. 

D, Predicted dispar ity tuning curve for an inhibitory neuron that selectively integrates from 

surrounding excitatory neurons with similar disparity tuning to correlated RDS. 

E, Alignment of excitatory and inhibitory disparity tuning curves for inhibition with matched dispari ty 

tuning to excitatory targets on average. 

F, Alignment of excitatory and inhibitory disparity tuning curves for inhibition that targets non -

preferred disparities for excitatory neurons on average. 

G, An ideal false match suppressing circuit where inhibit ory neurons target non -preferred 

disparities in excitatory neurons and have positive correlation between correlated and anti -

correlated RDS disparity tuning. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

the average activity of nearby excitatory neurons (Scholl et al., 2015) (Figure 2C). Because 

the anti -correlated tuning peaks of neighboring excitatory neurons are misaligned (Figure 

2B), such non -selective integration should yield relatively flat anti -correlated tuning curves 

compared with corr elated tuning (Figure 2C). In contrast, an inhibitory neuron that 

selectively integrates excitatory inputs with similar disparity preferences should exhibit 

tuning selectivity comparable to that of individual excitatory neurons, and its tuning should 

devia te from that predicted by non -selective local pooling (Figure 2D). Such neurons 

would most closely match the population -based prediction shown in Figure 2B and would 

exhibit an even greater departure from perfectly inverted tuning between correlated and 

an ti -correlated RDS (Figure 2D). 

Disparity -tuned inhibitory neurons could suppress disparity -tuned excitatory 

neurons with multiple potential strategies . Excitat ory and inhibi tory inputs to excitatory 

neurons might be co -tuned for the same preferred disparity for correlated RDS (Figure 2E) .

If the in hibition is modest and untuned or broadly -tuned compared to excitatory neurons ,

inhibition generally reduce s the responses without changing the shape of the tuning curve 

by lowering the gain (Atallah et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2012) . If the inhibition is strong 

and broadly -tuned , it will reduce some responses be low threshold and effectively sharpen 

tuning (Lee et al., 2012) . It is unclear how inhibition would reduce responses to false 

matches with this organization , since inhibition would have a similar effect of reducing 

modulation for correlated and anti -correlated disparity tuning . Alternatively, inhibitory 

neurons may selectively target excitatory neurons at their non -preferred disparities (Figur e

2F). In this case, the excitatory and inhibitory inputs would be competing with differing 

preferred disparities. With narrow or broad tuning, inhibition would sharpen dis parity 

tuning for correlated RDS (Figure 2F, top) . The scattering of anti -correlated disparity 

tuning curves results in weaker sharpening or even eliminates sharpening of disparity 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

tuning for anti -correlated RDS (Figure 2F, bottom). I n the most extreme case, if the 

scattering of anti -correlated RDS peak responses results in positive corre lation between 

disparity tuning to correlated and anti -correlated RDS, inhibition would sharpe n disparity 

tuning for correlated RDS and flatten tuning for anti -correlated RDS (Figure 2G). This 

would be the ideal inhibitory neuron for suppre ssing false matc hes. 

To understand how PV+ or SST+ inhibitory neurons might suppress false matches, 

we present analyses and experiments to (1) measure disparity tuning in inhibitory 

subclasses , ( 2) compare disparity tuning between correlated and anti -correlated RDS in 

inh ibitory subclasses, (3) characterize how inhibitory neurons integrate excitatory inputs, 

(4) characterize how inhibitory and excitatory neurons are connected with respect to 

disparity tuning, and (5) characterize how inhibitory neurons suppress excitatory 

responses. Th ese experiments and analyses demonstrate that PV+ and SST+ neurons play 

distinct roles in processing stereo information .

Inhibitory subclasses deviate from the disparity energy model 

If inhibitory neurons play a role in suppressing false matches , they may express distinct 

selectivity for disparity stimuli than excitatory neurons. Previous work has shown that PV+ 

inhibitory neurons have broad disparity tuning when using sine wave gratings (Scholl et 

al., 2015) , and we initially sought to characterize that selectivity using correlated RDS 

stimuli. We use d two -photon microscopy to measure visually evoked responses in PV -Cre 

and SST -Cre transgenic mice following virus injection to express GCaMP6s in all neurons 

(Figure 3A, green) and TdTomato in PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons (Figure 3A, red) ,

respectively . The majority of PV -/SST - neurons are represented by excitatory neurons, but 

they also include a percentage of other inhibitory neuron types, since GCAMP6s was 

expressed in all neurons. We found that both PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons exhibited 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

Figure 3. Inhibitory subclasses are selective to disparity, but deviate more from the 

energy model than excitatory neurons. 

A, Responses of neurons in PV -Cre transgenic mice were measured following virus injection to 

express GCaMP6s in all neurons and TdTomato in parvalbumin -expressing (PV+) neurons. 

Visually responsive and disparity -tuned neurons were identified based on changes in green 

calcium -dependent fluorescence and PV+ neurons were identified based on red fluorescence. 

B, Example disparity tunin g curve for a PV - neuron that responded to only a few disparities. 

C, Example disparity tuning curve for PV+ inhibitory neuron that responded to all disparities. 

D, Disparity selectivity was significantly weaker for PV+ versus PV - (left, Wilcoxon rank sum test, 

p < 0.001) .

E, Example disparity tuning curve for a SST - neuron that responded to only a few disparities. 

F, Example disparity tuning curve for a SST - inhibitory neuron that also responded to only a few 

disparities. 

G, T here was no significant differ ence in disparity selectivity between SST+ and SST - (right, 

Wilcoxon rank sum test, p = 0.98). 

H, Example disparity tuning curves for correlated and anti -correlated RDS for PV+ neurons. 

I, Example disparity tuning curves for correlated and anti -correlated RDS for SST+ neurons. 

J, Across mice, there is no significant difference in the modulation amplitude between anticorr and 

corr disparity tuning for PV+ and SST+ neurons compared excitatory neurons (Wilcoxon rank sum 

test, p = 0.29 and p = 0.91, respectively). 

K, For all disparity -tuned neurons, there is no significant difference in the modulation amplitude 

between anticorr and corr disparity tuning for PV+ and SST+ neurons compared excitatory 

neurons (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p = 0.23 and p = 0.63, respectively). 

L, Across mice, anticorr disparity tuning is not as negatively correlated with corr disparity tuning 

for SST+ neurons compared to excitatory neurons (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p = 0.02). 

M, For all disparity -tuned neurons, anticorr disparity tuning is not as negatively correlated with corr 

disparity tuning for both PV+ and SST+ neurons compared to excitatory neurons (Wilcoxon rank 

sum test, p = 0.005 and p < 0.001, respectively). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

robust disparity tuning (e.g., Figure 3C and 3F). We found that PV+ inhibitory neuron 

disparity sele ctivity for correlated stimuli wa s weaker compared to PV - neuron disparity 

tuning though (Figure 3B -D; see also Scholl et al., 2015) . Note that although this PV+ 

neuron is clearly disparity -tuned, it responde d robustly to all disparities tested (Figure 3C, 

all responses above the dashed line). On the other hand, we measured no significant 

difference for disparity selectivity between SST+ inhibitory and SST - neurons (Figure 3 E-

G). For SST+, SST - and PV - example neurons, we see that they only respond ed to some 

of the disparities tested (Figure 3B, 3E, and 3F , responses above the dashed line) . These 

two measures of disparity selectivity suggest that the roles these two inhibitory cells play 

in shaping disparity s electivity in excitatory neurons may be distinct. 

To cancel false matches prominent in anti -correlated RDS effectively, inhibitory 

neurons should integrate from excitatory neurons in a disparity -dependent manner to 

weaken modulation to anti -correlated disparity (Figure 2B). We found that PV+ (e.g., 

Figure 3H) and SST+ (e.g., Figure 3I) inhibitory neurons responded selectively to disparity 

in anti -correlated RDS, but the amplitude modulation ratio in PV+ and SST+ neurons was 

not signific antly reduced beyond what wa s seen in excitatory neurons (Figure 3J -K). The 

inversion in d isparity tuning though differed substantially . I nstead of a prominent negative 

correlation between correlated and anti -correlated tuning curves , the relationship bet ween 

these tuning curves for PV+ and SST+ neurons was closer to zero (Figure 3L-M). This 

scatter in the relationship between correlated and anti -correlated disparity tuning should 

result in flattened disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS when multiple in hibitory neurons 

target excitatory neurons . Overall, t his suggests that the integration performed by inhibitory 

neurons results in disparity tuning properties that deviate even farther from the energy 

model than what we observe in excitatory neurons (e.g., Figure 2 B). There were some 

neurons with positive correlation between correlated and anti -correlated RDS that would 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

potentially correspond to ideal false match suppression (Figure 2G) . Specific examples of 

high correlation generally had relatively flat tuning to anti -correlated disparity though (e.g., 

Figure 3I, right) and in general, tuning to anti -correlated RDS exhibited unexpected phase 

shifts with an average correlation close to zero. Nonetheless, these SST+ inhibitory neurons 

co uld potentially be effective in suppressing false matches. 

PV+ and SST+ i nhibitory neurons integrate disparity information differently across 

cortical space 

The origin of these differences in selectivity for disparity signals between excitatory, PV+ 

and SST+ neurons likely lies in how these neurons integrate excitatory input . Previous 

work has shown that PV + inhibitory neurons have broad disparity tuning due to the 

nonspecific pooling of nearby excitatory neurons (Scholl et al., 2015) . To probe for a circuit 

difference , we examined the relationship between inhibitory neurons and their surrounding 

network. Figure 4A shows an example PV+ inhibitory neuron (red ) and several example 

disparity -tuned PV - neurons (green) that are within 125 um of the PV+ inhibitory neuron .

Summing t he disparity tuning of each of these PV - neurons (Figure 4B) and all other 

surround visually responsive neurons (Figure 4A) roughly matches the tuning of the 

neighboring PV+ inhibitory neuron (Figure 4C, solid red versus solid light green ). 

As shown in Figure 2 A-B, preferred disparities for ant i-correlated RDS do not 

necessarily line up for neurons with similar preferred disparity for correlated RDS. 

Therefore, even though disparity tuning for correlated RDS for a PV+ inhibitory neuron 

can be predicted by surrounding PV - neurons, disparity tunin g for anti -correlated RDS 

might not be as predictable. The anti -correlated disparity tuning of our example PV+ 

neurons does not match up with the sum of the anti -correlated disparity tuning of the 

surrounding PV - neurons (Figure 4C, dashed red versus dashe d light green). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

We quantified this behavior by measuring the correlation between the disparity 

tuning curve of the inhibitory neuron (Figure 4C, red) and the average of the peak 

normalized disparity tuning curves of all significantly visually responsive neurons within 

125 μm of the inhibitory neuron (Figure 4C, light green) . For our example neuron, this 

correlation was 0.72. We then repeated this based on the anti -correlated disparity tuning 

curves (corresponding dashed lines) and the correlation for the example neuron was zero 

(Figure 4C, dashed red versus dashed light green) .

Overall, PV+ disparity tuning to correlated RDS is highly correlated with the 

average disparity tuning of all surrounding visually responsive PV - neurons within 125 um 

(Figure 4E, top row ). In contrast, disparity tuning for SST+ inhibitory or excitatory neurons 

have lower correlation with the average disparity tuning of su rround ing SST - or other 

excitatory neurons , respectively (Figure 4D and 4F, top row ). This difference is clear across 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

mice , where PV+ inhibitory neuron tuning consistently has a higher correlation with the 

disparity tuning of surrounding PV - neurons (Figure 4G, red filled circles ), as well as in 

the cumulative distributions of correlation for all neurons grouped together (Figure 4H,

solid red line ). Because disparity is not uniformly represented in the visual cortex (La 

Chioma et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2025) , there will always be some correlation of disparity 

tuning between individual neurons and surround ing neurons . Therefore, we also computed 

what the correlation would be if we shuffled which neurons were compared to which 

Figure 4. Local integration differs between PV + and SST + inhibitory neurons. 

A, Visually responsive (light) and disparity -tuned neurons (dark) were identified and ROIs are 

noted as green for PV - and red for PV+ .

B, Examples of disparity tuning in PV - neurons to correlated RDS (solid lines, filled circles ) and 

anti -correlated RDS (dashed line, open circles) fit with Gabor functions. Error bars are standard 

error. 

C, Example of disparity tuning in a PV+ neuron (top) compared to the sum of responses to all PV -

visually responsive neurons within a radius of 125 μm (bottom) .

D, The correlation between disparity tuning for a single excitatory neuron and the average of 

normalized disparity tuning curves for all visually responsive excitatory neurons within a radius of 

125 μm. Darkened data points are neurons with significant disparity tuning. Top row is disparity 

tuning for correlated RDS and bottom row is disparity tuning for anti -correlated RDS. 

E, The correlation between disparity tuning for a single PV+ neuron and the average of normalized 

disparity tuning curves for all visually responsive PV - neurons within a radius of 125 μm. 

F, Same as E, but for SST -Cre mice where TdTomato was expressed in somatostatin expressing 

(SST+) neurons. 

G, Across mice, the average correlation within a radius of 125 μm for PV+ neurons for correlated 

RDS (filled circles) was signifi cantly higher compared to excitatory, SST+ neurons, and the 

shuffled prediction (Wilcoxon rank sum test for all subsequent comparisons, p = 0.001, p = 0.01, 

and p < 0.001, respectively). There was no significant difference in local correlation between mice 

for correlated RDS for excitatory, SST+ neurons, and the shuffled prediction (p = 0.41, p = 0.44, 

and p = 0.12, respectively). The correlation significantly dropped for PV+ and SST+ from 

correlated to anti -correlated RDS (p = 0.003 and p = 0.03, respectiv ely), but not for excitatory 

neurons (p = 0.44). There was no significant difference in local correlation between mice for anti -

correlated RDS for excitatory, PV+ neurons, and the shuffled prediction (p = 0.64, p = 1, and p = 

0.64, respectively). 

H, These comparisons were even clearer for aggregated data. The average correlation within a 

radius of 125 μm for PV+ neurons for correlated RDS (solid lines) was significantly higher 

compared to excitatory, SST+ neurons, and the shuffled prediction (p < 0.001). Th ere was no 

significant difference in local correlation among neurons for correlated RDS for excitatory, SST+ 

neurons, and the shuffled prediction (p = 0. 79 , p = 0. 39 , and p = 0. 55 , respectively). The correlation 

significantly dropped for PV+ and SST+ from correlated to anti -correlated RDS (p < 0.00 1 and p 

= 0.0 5, respectively), but not for excitatory neurons (p = 0. 77 ). The average correlation within a 

radius of 125 μm for SST+ neurons for anti -correlated RDS ( dashed lines ) was significantly lower 

compared to excitatory neurons and the shuffled prediction (p = 0.01 and p = 0.0 5, respectively). 

There was no significant difference in local correlation among neurons for anti -correlated RDS for 

excitatory, PV+ neurons, and the shuffled prediction (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p = 0.6 9, p = 0.24 ,

and p = 0. 97 , respectively). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

surrounding neurons. This correlation was on average just below 0. 16 and is noted by the 

dashed lines in Figure 4G and 4H. PV+ inhibitory neurons were the only neurons with 

correlation significantly above this prediction. This suggests that the tuning of PV+ 

inhibitory neurons is predicted by the tuning of neurons in its local neighborhood well 

beyond chance and that PV+ inhibitory neurons are integrating the responses of 

sur rounding excitatory neurons relatively non -specifically. The weaker correlation for 

SST+ inhibitory neuron s suggests that they may be integrating the responses of 

surrounding excitatory neurons in a more selective manner , since the neurons are still as 

selective for disparity as excitatory neurons (Figure 3G) . Since disparity is heterogeneously 

represented in the visual cortex of mice (Scholl e t al., 2015) , non -selective integration 

explains the broader disparity tuning for PV+ neurons (Figure 3D) .

Overall, disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS is not predicted by the activity of 

surrounding neurons. There is no difference in the correlation between disparity tuning for 

excitatory neurons and surrounding neurons for correlated RDS, anti -correlated RDS, and 

the shuffled prediction (Figure 4D, 4G, and 4H). The correla tion between disparity tuning 

for both PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons and surrounding neurons though significantly 

decreases for anti -correlated RDS compared to correlated RDS (Figure 4E -H). This 

supports that both subclasses of inhibitory neurons are int egrating from excitatory neurons 

in a disparity -dependent manner for correlated RDS (either due to local biases or selective 

connectivity) and not for anti -correlated RDS as predicted in Figure 2B. The correlation 

between anti -correlated disparity tuning f or PV+ inhibitory neurons and surrounding PV -

neurons is not significantly different from excitatory neurons or the shuffled prediction 

(Figure 4G -H) . Although the difference is small, the correlation between anti -correlated 

disparity tuning for SST+ inhib itory neurons and surrounding SST - neurons is surprisingly 

significantly lower than what we measure for excitatory neurons or the shuffled prediction 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

(Figure 4H). This is consistent with Figure 3 L-M suggesting a large deviation in the energy 

model prediction for the relationship between correlated and anti -correlated disparity 

tuning . This provides additional support that SST+ inhibitory neurons might be particular ly 

suited for suppressing false matches in anti -correlated RDS. 

Noise correlati on involving PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons also suggests differen t

circuitry between subclasses 

Correlated variability (noise correlation) between pairs of neurons can also be used to infer 

connectivity among neurons (Zohary et al., 1994; Shadlen and Newsome, 1998; Smith and 

Kohn, 2008) . If two neurons are connected via a direct or indirect excitatory synaptic 

connection or receive synaptic inputs from a common input , they will have positive noise 

correlation. If an incre ase in activity from one neuron causes a decrease in activity in 

another neuron due to a direct or indirect inhibitory synaptic connection, they will have 

negative noise correlation. We measured noise correlation for excitatory -to -excitatory (E -

E) neuron pairs, putative excitatory -to -inhibitory (E -I) neuron pairs, and inhibitory -to -

inhibitory neuron pairs (within the same subclass) to better under stand how different 

subtypes of inhibitory neurons integrate and modulate disparity information .

Noise correlation has previously been shown to depend on similarity in disparity 

preference, but not on cortical distance for E -E neuronal pairs (La Chioma et al., 2020) .

We confirmed that noise correlation for excitatory neuron pairs depended on disparity 

tunin g similarity ( signal correlation; Figure 5A, black). Our data suggests that excitatory 

neurons with more similar disparity tuning are more likely to excite each other (positive 

noise correlation) and neurons with very different tuning are more likely to suppress each 

other (negative noise correlation). We f ound that all combinations of E -I and I -I neuronal 

pairs also significantly depended on disparity tuning similarity as well (Figure 5A, columns 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

2-5), which was consistent across mice (Figure 5C). This suggests that there is some 

organized disparity -depende nt circuitry involving both PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons. 

This could be due to local biases in disparity preference (La Chioma et al., 2020; Brown et 

al., 2025) or due to selective integration of excitatory inputs (Figure 4 ). This would 

generate more positive noise correlation among neurons with more similar disparity tuning. 

Noise correlation does not only represent the excitatory inputs to inhibitory neurons 

Figure 5. Trial -to -trial covariations are strongest for neuron pairs including PV+ neurons. 

A, For all neuron pairs with significant disparity tuning, trial -to -trial covariation (noise correlation) 

depends on disparity tuning similarity (signal correlation). 

B, For all neuron pairs with significant disparity tuning, noise correlation depends on distanc e

between neurons. The negative correlation with distance was significantly stronger for PV -/PV+ 

pairs compared to pairs of excitatory neurons (Steiger Test, p = 0.01). 

C, Noise correlation depended on signal correlation consistently across mice (Wilcoxon signed 

rank test, p < 0.001 for Exc/Exc, p = 0.02 for PV -/PV+, and p = 0.02 for SST -/SST+). 

D, Noise correlation depended on distance only consistently across mice for PV -/PV+ pairs of 

neurons (Wilcoxon signed rank test, p = 0.03). 

E, Based on averages in each mouse, noise correlation is generally small (<0.1) for all pairs of 

neurons except PV+/PV+ pairs. For PV+/PV+ pairs noise correlation was generally greater than 

0.1 and was significantly higher compared to pairs of excitatory neurons in mice (Wilco xon rank 

sum test, p = 0.004). 

F, The aggregate distribution of noise correlation in all PV+/PV+ neurons is clearly and 

significantly larger than the noise correlation measured in all other pairs of neurons not involving 

PV+ neurons (Wilcoxon rank sum test , p < 0.001). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

though . It also represents the potential connections from inhibitory neurons back to 

excitatory neurons that suppress excitatory responses . Th e negative noise correlation 

among neuron pairs with very different disparity tuning (negative signal correlation) 

suggests that both PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons could be selectively suppressing non -

preferred disparity responses in excitatory neurons (Figure 2F). 

We observed that the dependence of noise correlation on cortical distance for 

excitatory neurons was very weak, but was still statistically significant (Figure 5B, black). 

The dependence of noise correlation on cortical distance appeared to be stronger for 

neuronal pairs involving inhibitory neurons (E -I or I -I) compared to E -E pairs although the 

relationship was only statistically significant for PV+ -to -PV - pairs of neurons (Figure 5B

and 5D). This suggests that circuits involving PV+ inhibitor y neurons in particular are 

local ized compared to other circuits .

The most contrasting noise correlation result we found between excitatory neurons 

and subclasses of inhibitory neurons was that noise correlat ion was higher when PV+ 

neurons were pa rt of th e pair (Figure 5E-F). Noise correlation is generally on average much 

smaller than 0.1, but the average noise correlation among PV+ neuronal pairs was 0.2. This 

higher noise correlation is consistent with PV+ inhibitory neurons integrating inputs from 

excit atory neurons less discriminately compared to SST+ inhibitory neurons. Greater 

numbers of connections between PV+ inhibitory neurons and excitatory neurons would 

increase their shared variability and increase the amount of shared input among pairs of 

PV+ to PV+ inhibitory neurons .

Our measures of functional connectivity by noise correlation and the spatial 

integration of PV+ and SST+ neurons indicate differences in the network connectivity of 

these neurons relative to their excitatory counterparts. PV+ ne urons appear to be more 

coupled to nearby excitatory cells and to their own population than any circuits involving 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

SST+ neurons. This dense connectivity by PV+ cells likely underlies their weak disparity 

selectivity to correlated RDS. In contrast , SST+ neu rons display noise correlation 

structures and spatial integrative properties that appear more selective, akin to their 

excitatory counterparts. This specificity, and the lac k of a 180 -degree inversion for anti -

correlated RDS, suggest that they may play a r ole in suppressing false matches between 

the two eyes. 

PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons sharpen disparity tuning to correlated RDS 

A limitation of noise correlation (Figure 5) is that the interaction between two neurons is 

only represented by a single val ue. Interactions between excitatory and PV+ or SST+ 

inhibitory neurons are in both direction s. Our measurements of correlation between 

disparity tuning of PV+ or SST+ neurons and disparity tuning of the average activity of 

surrounding PV - and SST - neurons focus on the direction from excitatory to inhibitory 

neurons (Figure 4). These results revealed to us the organization of how PV+ and SST+ 

inhibitory neurons integrate the responses of excitatory neurons . To focus on the other 

direction, we need ed to measure the influence of these inhibitory cell classes on disparity 

selectivity in excitatory neurons . We empl oyed optogenetics to selectively suppress the 

activity of either PV+ or SST+ neuron s and then measured how this affected disparity 

tuning to corr elated and anti -correlated RDS of the remaining population . Our goal wa s to 

suppress inhibitory responses, but not to inactivate these neurons completely. If either of 

these cell classes plays a role in sharpening selectivity for disparity , then suppressin g them 

should reduce disparity selectivity to correlated RDS. On the other hand, if these cell 

classes play a role in suppressing false matches present in anti -correlated RDS, then we 

expect anti -correlated selectivity to increase with optogenetic suppres sion .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

PV -Cre and SST -Cre animals were injected with an adeno -associated virus labeling 

all neurons with GCaMP6s and only neurons express ing Cre (PV+ or SST+) with 

TdTomato and Archaerhodopsin -3 (Arch) . Arch is a light -activated outward proton pump 

that hyperpolarizes the cell when triggered by green -yellow light and optogenetically 

inhibit s neuron al responses (Chow et al., 2010 ). We used ArchT , which is an Arch variant 

with increased light sensitivity and can inhibit spiking in neurons with 595 nm (orange) 

Figure 6. Optogenetics experimental setup. 

A, Left, we used a pi cell liquid crystal shutter in front of the PMT to reduce light bleedthrough. 

The LED was also synchronized to the pi cell and only delivered light when the shutter was 

closed (dashed orange line). Right, for even illumination of the imaging field, the LED light was 

routed through the objective. 

B, Example SST -Cre animal with ArchT. Red circles identify visua l SST+ neurons and green 

circles identify visual SST - neurons. 

C, We varied the LED power and measured the normalized response in both SST+ and SST -

neurons (the same neurons in Figure 5B). We found that the SST+ neurons had a decrease in 

activity when th e LED came on, and the SST - neurons had an increase in activity, confirming 

that the optogenetic manipulation was working. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

light. We used an LED delivering 59 0 nm light routed through the objective every other 

frame to quasi -simultaneously induce optogenetic supp ression of PV+ or SST+ neurons 

while imaging calcium responses from all neurons (Figure 6A, right). In order to reduce 

any light from the LED inadvertently being recorded as signal by the PMT, we added a pi 

cell liquid crystal shutter in front of the PMT ( Figure 6A, left). The LED was synchronized 

with the pi cell and only delivered light when the shutter was closed ( Figure 6A, dashed 

line). We only a nalyzed frames in which the shutter was open and the LED was off. LED 

power was calibrated b y measuring it a t the objective and testing where the responses of 

PV+ and SST+ neurons had their responses reduced to 50% on average ( Figure 6B-C). 

Since the red channel was used to deliver the LED light to the window during two -photon 

imaging , we used changes in the res ponse properties to LED activation to classify neurons 

as PV+ versus PV - and SST+ versus SST -. Neurons with a significant decrease in response 

in the 2 -s period (30 frames) when the LED was on compared to the response when the 

LED was off before stimulus o nset were classified as PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons .

All other neurons were classified as PV - and SST -. PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons were 

consistently suppressed by the LED during visual evoked activity , as well (Figure S2 , red) .

Visually evoked res ponses for SST - neurons were generally disinhibited by SST+ 

suppression , but responses for PV - neurons were not clearly disinhibited or suppressed by 

PV+ suppression (Figure S2 , blue ). 

We first examine d how disparity tuning changed in putative excitatory neurons in 

response to correlated RDS with optogenetic suppression of inhibitory neuron responses .

We fou nd in general that disparity tuning broade ns after PV + or SST + suppression (Figure 

7A and 7F) with consistently reduced amplitude modulation (Figure 7B and 7G) . T he 

broader tuning and reduced amplitude modulation of PV - and SST - neurons with PV+ and 

SST+ s uppression , respectively, was generally associated with stronger disinhibition at the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

least preferred disparities (Figure 7A and 7F) . Overall, these d ata show that PV+ and SST+ 

inhibitory subclasses of neurons sharpen disparity tuning in excitatory neurons by 

Figure 7. Suppression of PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons increase s the amplitude 

modulation ratio. 

A, Optogenetic suppression of PV+ inhibitory neurons broadens disparity tuning to correlated 

RDS for PV - neurons. Error bars are standard error (n = 10 trials). 

B, The amplitude modulation for disparity tuning to correlated stereograms significantly 

decreased for PV - neurons during optogenetic suppression of PV+ inhibitory neurons (Wilcoxon 

signed rank test, p < 0.001). 

C, Optogenetic suppression of PV+ inhibitory neurons also broadens disparity tuning to anti -

correlated RDS for PV - neurons (same neuron as A). 

D, The amplitude modulation for disparity tuning to anti -correlated stereograms also significantly 

decreased for PV - neurons during optogenetic suppression of PV+ inhibitory neurons (Wilcoxon 

signed rank test, p < 0.001). 

E, The amplitude modulation ratio between anti -correlated and correlated disparity tuning 

significantly increased to close to 1 (from 0.65 to 0.92) when PV+ neurons were optogenetically 

suppressed (n = 111 neurons, Wilcoxon signed rank test, p < 0.001). There was no significant 

change in the corr elation between correlated and anti -correlated disparity tuning (Wilcoxon 

signed rank test, p = 0.83). 

F, Optogenetic suppression of SST+ inhibitory neurons broadens disparity tuning to correlated 

RDS for SST - neurons. 

G, The amplitude modulation for disp arity tuning to correlated stereograms significantly 

decreased for SST - neurons during optogenetic suppression of SST+ inhibitory neurons 

(Wilcoxon signed rank test, p < 0.001). 

H, Optogenetic suppression of SST+ inhibitory neurons sharpens disparity tunin g to anti -

correlated RDS for SST - neurons (same neuron as F). 

I, The amplitude modulation for disparity tuning to anti -correlated stereograms significantly 

increased for SST - neurons during optogenetic suppression of SST+ inhibitory neurons 

(Wilcoxon sig ned rank test, p = 0.03). 

J, The amplitude modulation ratio between anti -correlated and correlated disparity tuning 

significantly increased to close to 1 (from 0.59 to 0.92) when SST+ neurons were optogenetically 

suppressed (n = 84 neurons, Wilcoxon signed rank test, p < 0.001). There was no significant 

change in the correlation between correlated and anti -correlated disparity tuning (Wilcoxon 

signed rank test, p = 0.52). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

su ppressing the responses to non -preferred disparities consistent with our prediction in 

Figure 2F .

PV+ inhibitory neurons sharpen and SST+ inhibitory neurons broaden disparity 

tuning to anti -correlated RDS 

Similar to excitatory neurons (Figure 1C-D), PV - and SST - neurons generally responded 

to anti -correlated RDS with an inversion in tuning of a reduced magnitude compared with 

the response to correlated RDS ( e.g., Figure 7C and 7H versus Figure 7A and 7F). We 

hypothesized that inhibitory neurons could cause this reduced magnitude in response to 

anti -correlated RDS . PV+ or SST+ could be selectively inhibiting the responses to false 

matches, thus helping to solve the stereo correspondence problem. If this were the case, 

when PV+ or SST+ neurons are optoge netically suppressed, we should expect to see larger 

amplitude modulation in disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS .

For PV - neurons, suppression of PV+ inhibitory responses broadened disparity 

tuning to anti -correlated RDS in a similar manner as observe d for disparity tuning to 

correlated RDS (Figure 7C). The amplitude modulation of PV - neurons was consistently 

reduced by suppression of PV+ inhibitory neurons (Figure 7D). The reduction in amplitude 

modulation for disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS c aused by PV+ suppression though 

was significantly smaller than the reduction in amplitude modulation for disparity tuning 

to correlated RDS (Wilcoxon signed rank test, p < 0.001). This produces an increase in 

amplitude modulation ratios with suppres sion of PV+ inhibitory neurons (Figure 7E). 

Therefore, although PV+ inhibitory neurons did not selectively suppress false matches, 

they more effectively sharpen ed disparity tuning for correlated than anti -correlated RDS. 

For a majority of SST - neurons, suppressio n of SST+ inhibitory responses 

sharpen ed disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS (Figure 7H). Although the effect was 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

modest on average , t he amplitude modulation of SST - neurons significantly increased from 

an average of 0.06 to 0.07 with suppression of SST + inhibitory neurons ( Figure 7I). The 

combination of an increase in amplitude modulation for disparity tuning to anti -correlated 

RDS and a reduction in amplitude modulation for disparity tuning to correlated RDS with 

suppression of SST+ inhibitory neuro ns results in an increase in amplitude modulation 

ratios (Figure 7J). 

## Discussion 

The disparity energy model predicts that the 180 -degree phase -shifted disparity tuning to 

anti -correlated RDS sh ould have the same magnitude of amplitude modulation as dispa rity 

tuning to correlated RDS (Ohzawa et al., 1990) . We have shown that disparity tuning to 

anti -correlated stereograms in excitatory neurons has weake r modulation with respect to 

correlated stereograms (Figure 1), in agreement with previous work (Cumming and Parker, 

1997; Ohzawa et al., 1997; La Chioma et al., 2020) . We hypothesized that circuits 

involving PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons could suppress the false matches found in 

anti -correlated RDS and explain their reduced amplitude modulation (Figur e 2) . Our 

optogenetic results suggest that PV+ inhibitory neurons sharpen disparity tuning to 

correlated RDS and sharpen disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS to a lesser extent for 

excitatory neurons (Figure 7C-D). We found that SST+ neurons sharpen dis parity tuning 

to correlated RDS and had a small, but significant effect consistent with SST+ inhibitory 

neurons broadening disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS for excitatory neurons (Figure 

7H -I). This supports that the SST + microcircuit selec tively su ppresses false matches and 

indicates that PV+ and SST+ inhibitory microcircuits perform distinct computations with 

respect to stereo matching .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

The microcircuit involving PV+ inhibitory neurons has characteristics that are 

consistent with previous work (Scholl et al., 2015) and consistent with our predi ction in 

Figure 2 C. Multiple analyses indicated that PV+ neurons broadly pool local disparity 

information, including less selective disparity tuning than neighboring excitatory neurons, 

stronger correlation with local population responses, and higher noise correlations. These 

observations support the idea that PV+ neurons receive substantial shared input and 

regulate the gain of local excitatory populations rather than performing highly selective 

stereo computations (Atallah et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2012) . Nonetheless, optogenetic 

suppression of PV+ neurons broadened disparity tuning in excitatory neurons, indicating 

that PV+ inhibition sharpens disparity selectivity. This effect is likely possible because 

PV+ neurons are themselves mildly disparity -tuned and because local biases i n disparity 

preference exist within mouse visual cortex (La Chioma et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2025). 

Notably, the sharpening produced by PV+ neurons was stronger for correlated than anti -

correlated RDS. Together with the weaker agreement between PV+ respo nses and disparity 

energy model predictions for anti -correlated stimuli, these results suggest that PV+ neurons 

enhance responses to correct matches more effectively than responses to false matches. 

Thus, while PV+ neurons do not appear to selectively supp ress false matches, they may 

contribute to stereo correspondence by improving the representation of correct matches. 

The microcircuit involving SST + inhibitory neurons exhibited several properties 

distinct from the PV+ inhibitory mic rocircuit and consis tent with the hypothesis in Figure 

2D. In contrast to PV+ neurons , SST+ inhibitory neurons showed evidence of more 

selective integration of disparity information, including weaker shared variability with 

neighboring neurons and tuning that was less predict able from the surrounding population. 

Optogenetic suppression of SST+ inhibitory neurons broadened disparity tuning indicating 

that both inhibitory cell classes sharpen selectivity (Figure 7F-G) . SST+ neurons, however, 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

deviated substantially from disparit y energy model predictions and was poorly correlated 

with surrounding neurons ( even below the shuffled prediction ), suggesting specialized 

processing of disparity information . Consistent with this idea, SST+ inhibitory neurons 

broadened selectivity to anti -correlated RDS , demonstrating a role for suppressing false 

matches . An alternative possibility is that the disparity tuning for anti -correlated RDS is on 

average relatively flat (e.g., Figure 3I, right) in SST+ inhibitory neurons and their 

suppression of excitatory responses is pu ll ing responses below the spiking threshold 

(Figure S2 ) (Xu et al., 2 026) . Regardless of the underlying mechanism , SST + inhibitory 

neurons appeared to be especially suited to play an important role in stereo matching by 

both enhancing correct matches and suppressing false matches. 

There are a few major limitations of our data that are important to our 

interpretations. First, we were not ever simultaneously observing excitatory, PV+ 

inhibitory, and SST+ inhibitory neurons at the same time . We were measuring either 

excitatory neurons alone, or PV+ inhibitory neurons compared to all other neurons (PV -,

excitatory and othe r inhibitory neurons) , or SST+ inhibitory neurons compared to all other 

neurons (SST -, excitatory and other inhibitory neurons). Even though the majority of “all 

other neurons” will be excitatory neurons, we cannot rule out that other inhibitory 

subclasses contributed to any effects that we observed. Inhibitory neurons with high 

spiking rates might even have a larger representation in our optogenetic experiments 

because these cells have brighter GCaMP responses. T he pi cell we used is polarized 

introducing additional filtering that could mask excitatory neurons that are relatively less 

responsive with lower brightness . Second, inhibitory neurons also receive inputs from other 

inhibitory neurons. Inhibitory inputs to PV+ inhibitory neurons come mostly from la yer 

2/3, whereas SST+ inhibitory neurons receive inhibition from layers 2/3, 4, and 5 (Xu and 

Callaway, 2009) . Recent work has shown that SST+ inhibitory neurons inhibit PV+ 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

inhibitory neurons (Cottam et al., 2013; Pfeffer et al., 2013; Pi et al., 2013) and PV+ 

neurons also inhibit SST+ neurons, albeit less strongly (Pfeffer et al., 2013; Walker et al., 

2016) . Because SST+ inhibitory neurons are known to strongly inhibit PV+ inhibitory 

neurons, some of the sharpening of disparity tuning to anti -correlated RDS with 

suppression of SST+ inhibitory neurons could be due to PV+ inhibitory neuron 

disinhibition (Cardin, 2018) . This seems unlikely though since PV+ inhibitory neurons 

sharpen disparity tuning more strongly for correlated RDS compared to anti -correlated 

RDS (Figu re 7B and 7D) and we found that disparity tuning to correlated RDS actually 

broadened with suppression of SST+ inhibitory neurons. Lastly, even with SST+ 

suppression of false matches, excitatory neurons in the visual cortex still have disparity -

dependent r esponses to anti -correlated RDS so additional mechanisms that were not 

examined in this study are necessary to solve the stereo correspondence problem 

completely .

The results of our experiments provide important constraints as to how distinct 

cortical circ uits contribute to solving the stereo correspondence problem. We revealed that 

PV+ and SST+ inhibitory neurons are likely enhancing selectivity to correlated RDS and 

effectively amplifying correct matches. T he anti -correlated optogenetic results reveal 

dif ferences between these subclasses of inhibitory neurons that are consistent with 

differences in their disparity tuning properties and organization within the cortical network .

This distinction supports the conclusion that SST+ inhibitory neurons play a n ad ditional 

important role in suppressing the responses to false matches .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

## References 

Adesnik H, Bruns W, Taniguchi H, Huang ZJ, Scanziani M (2012) A neural circuit for 

spatial summation in visual cortex. Nature 490:226 -231. 

Atallah BV, Bruns W, Carandini M, Scanziani M (2012) Parvalbumin -expressing 

interneurons linearly transform cortical responses to visual stimuli. Neuron 73:159 -

170. 

Brown TC, Barr C, Antin M, Nguyen V, McGee AW, Samonds JM (2025) Degraded 

mapping of disparity tuning i n visual cortex explains deficits in binocular depth 

perception. biorxiv. 

Cardin JA (2018) Inhibitory Interneurons Regulate Temporal Precision and Correlations 

in Cortical Circuits. Trends Neurosci 41:689 -700. 

Chen Y, Qian N (2004) A coarse -to -fine dispari ty energy model with both phase -shift and 

position -shift receptive field mechanisms. Neural Comput 16:1545 -1577. 

Chow BY, Han X, Dobry AS, Qian X, Chuong AS, Li M, Henninger MA, Belfort GM, Lin 

Y, Monahan PE, Boyden ES (2010) High -performance genetically t argetable 

optical neural silencing by light -driven proton pumps. Nature 463:98 -102. 

Cogan AI, Lomakin AJ, Rossi AF (1993) Depth in anticorrelated stereograms: effects of 

spatial density and interocular delay. Vision Res 33:1959 -1975. 

Cottam JC, Smith SL, H ausser M (2013) Target -specific effects of somatostatin -expressing 

interneurons on neocortical visual processing. J Neurosci 33:19567 -19578. 

Cumming BG, Parker AJ (1997) Responses of primary visual cortical neurons to binocular 

disparity without depth perc eption. Nature 389:280 -283. 

Cumming BG, Shapiro SE, Parker AJ (1998) Disparity detection in anticorrelated 

stereograms. Perception 27:1367 -1377. 

Dana H, Chen TW, Hu A, Shields BC, Guo CY, Looger LL, Kim DS, Svoboda K (2014) 

Thy1 -GCaMP6 Transgenic Mice for Neuronal Population In Vivo. Plos One 9. 

Dantzker JL, Callaway EM (2000) Laminar sources of synaptic input to cortical inhibitory 

interneurons and pyramidal neurons. Nat Neurosci 3:701 -707. 

Deangelis GC, Ohzawa I, Freeman RD (1991) Depth Is Encoded in the Visual -Cortex by 

a Specialized Receptive -Field Structure. Nature 352:156 -159. 

Dombeck DA, Khabbaz AN, Collman F, Adelman TL, Tank DW (2007) Imaging large -

scale neural activity with cellular resolution in awake, mobile mice. Neuron 56:43 -

57. 

Garrett ME, Nauhaus I, Marshel JH, Callaway EM (2014) Topography and areal 

organization of mouse visual cortex. J Neurosci 34:12587 -12600. 

Hibbard PB, Scott -Brown KC, Haigh EC, Adrain M (2014) Depth perception not found in 

human observers for static or dynamic anti -co rrelated random dot stereograms. Plos 

One 9:e84087. 

Jones EG, Hendry SHC (1984) Basket cells. In: Cerebral Cortex (Peters A, Jones EG, eds), 

pp 309 -336. New York: Plenum Press. 

Julesz B (1969) Foundations of Cyclopean Perception. J Opt Soc Am 59:1544 -&. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

Ju lesz B, Tyler CW (1976) Neurontropy, an entropy -like measure of neural correlation, in 

binocular fusion and rivalry. Biol Cybern 23:25 -32. 

Kalatsky VA, Stryker MP (2003) New paradigm for optical imaging: Temporally encoded 

maps of intrinsic signal. Neuron 38:529 -545. 

Kawaguchi Y, Kubota Y (1997) GABAergic cell subtypes and their synaptic connections 

in rat frontal cortex. Cereb Cortex 7:476 -486. 

La Chioma A, Bonhoeffer T, Hubener M (2019) Area -Specific Mapping of Binocular 

Disparity across Mouse Visual Cort ex. Curr Biol 29:2954 -+. 

La Chioma A, Bonhoeffer T, Hubener M (2020) Disparity Sensitivity and Binocular 

Integration in Mouse Visual Cortex Areas. J Neurosci 40:8883 -8899. 

Lee SH, Kwan AC, Zhang S, Phoumthipphavong V, Flannery JG, Masmanidis SC, 

Taniguchi H, Huang ZJ, Zhang F, Boyden ES, Deisseroth K, Dan Y (2012) 

Activation of specific interneurons improves V1 feature selectivity and visual 

perception. Nature 488:379 -383. 

Lippert J, Wagner H (2001) A threshold explains modulation of neural responses to 

opp osite -contrast stereograms. Neuroreport 12:3205 -3208. 

Lovett -Barron M, Kaifosh P, Kheirbek MA, Danielson N, Zaremba JD, Reardon TR, Turi 

GF, Hen R, Zemelman BV, Losonczy A (2014) Dendritic inhibition in the 

hippocampus supports fear learning. Science 343:8 57 -863. 

Menz MD, Freeman RD (2003) Stereoscopic depth processing in the visual cortex: a 

coarse -to -fine mechanism. Nat Neurosci 6:59 -65. 

Nauhaus I, Ringach DL (2007) Precise alignment of micromachined electrode arrays with 

V1 functional maps. J Neurophysio l 97:3781 -3789. 

Nieder A, Wagner H (2001) Hierarchical processing of horizontal disparity information in 

the visual forebrain of behaving owls. J Neurosci 21:4514 -4522. 

Ohzawa I, Deangelis GC, Freeman RD (1990) Stereoscopic Depth Discrimination in the 

Visu al -Cortex - Neurons Ideally Suited as Disparity Detectors. Science 249:1037 -

1041. 

Ohzawa I, DeAngelis GC, Freeman RD (1997) Encoding of binocular disparity by complex 

cells in the cat's visual cortex. J Neurophysiol 77:2879 -2909. 

Pfeffer CK, Xue M, He M, H uang ZJ, Scanziani M (2013) Inhibition of inhibition in visual 

cortex: the logic of connections between molecularly distinct interneurons. Nat 

Neurosci 16:1068 -1076. 

Pi HJ, Hangya B, Kvitsiani D, Sanders JI, Huang ZJ, Kepecs A (2013) Cortical 

interneurons that specialize in disinhibitory control. Nature 503:521 -524. 

Prince SJD, Cumming BG, Parker AJ (2002a) Range and mechanism of encoding of 

horizontal disparity in macaque V1. J Neurophysiol 87:209 -221. 

Prince SJD, Pointon AD, Cumming BG, Parker AJ (2002b) Quantitative analysis of the 

responses of V1 neurons to horizontal disparity in dynamic random -dot 

stereograms. J Neurophysiol 87:191 -208. 

Read JCA, Cumming BG (2007) Sensors for impossible stimuli may solve the stereo 

correspondence problem. Nat Neurosci 10:1322 -1328. 

Ringach DL, Shapley RM, Hawken MJ (2002) Orientation selectivity in macaque V1: 

diversity and laminar dependence. J Neurosci 22:5639 -5651. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.15.738526 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

Samonds JM, Potetz BR, Lee TS (2009) Cooperative and Competitive Interactions 

Facilitate Stereo Computa tions in Macaque Primary Visual Cortex. J Neurosci 

29:15780 -15795. 

Samonds JM, Geisler WS, Priebe NJ (2018) Natural image and receptive field statistics 

predict saccade sizes. Nat Neurosci 21:1591 -1599. 

Samonds JM, Choi V, Priebe NJ (2019) Mice Discriminat e Stereoscopic Surfaces Without 

Fixating in Depth. J Neurosci 39:8024 -8037. 

Samonds JM, Potetz BR, Tyler CW, Lee TS (2013) Recurrent Connectivity Can Account 

for the Dynamics of Disparity Processing in V1. J Neurosci 33:2934 -2946. 

Scholl B, Pattadkal JJ, D illy GA, Priebe NJ, Zemelman BV (2015) Local Integration 

Accounts for Weak Selectivity of Mouse Neocortical Parvalbumin Interneurons. 

Neuron 87:424 -436. 

Shadlen MN, Newsome WT (1998) The variable discharge of cortical neurons: 

Implications for connectivity, computation, and information coding. J Neurosci 

18:3870 -3896. 

Smith MA, Kohn A (2008) Spatial and Temporal Scales of Neuronal Correlation in 

Primary Visual Cortex. J Neurosci 28:12591 -12603. 

Tanabe S, Haefner RM, Cumming BG (2011) Suppressive mechanisms in monkey V1 help 

to solve the stereo correspondence problem. J Neurosci 31:8295 -8305. 

Walker F, Mock M, Feyerabend M, Guy J, Wagener RJ, Schubert D, Staiger JF, Witte M 

(2016) Parvalbumin - and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide -expressing neoco rtical 

interneurons impose differential inhibition on Martinotti cells. Nat Commun 

7:13664. 

Wang Y, Toledo -Rodriguez M, Gupta A, Wu C, Silberberg G, Luo J, Markram H (2004) 

Anatomical, physiological and molecular properties of Martinotti cells in the 

somat osensory cortex of the juvenile rat. J Physiol 561:65 -90. 

Wekselblatt JB, Flister ED, Piscopo DM, Niell CM (2016) Large -scale imaging of cortical 

dynamics during sensory perception and behavior. J Neurophysiol 115:2852 -2866. 

Wilson NR, Runyan CA, Wang FL, Sur M (2012) Division and subtraction by distinct 

cortical inhibitory networks in vivo. Nature 488:343 -348. 

Xu G, Liu X, Liu J, Zhou Y (2026) GABAergic interneuron subtypes differentially regulate 

noise correlations that are critical for visual orientation discrimination in mice. Cell 

Rep 45:116805. 

Xu X, Callaway EM (2009) Laminar specificity of functional input to distinct types of 

inhibitory cortical neurons. J Neurosci 29:70 -85. 

Zohary E, Shadlen MN, Newsome WT (1994) Correlated neuronal discharge rate and its 

implications for psychophysical performance. Nature 370:140 -143.