Title: Dendritic structure enables powerful plasticity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.23251v2

Published Time: Wed, 26 Aug 2026 01:21:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Dendritic structure enables powerful plasticity 

Ben von Hünerbein a, ∗, Federico Benitez a, ∗, Kevin Max b, Julian Göltz a, Paul Haider a, Simon Brandt a, Arno Granier c,Timo Gierlich a, Jakob Jordan a, Katharina A. Wilmes d, Jean-Pascal Pfister a, Walter Senn a, Mihai A. Petrovici a

> aDepartment of Physiology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
> bNeural Computation Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Onna, Japan
> cDépartement d’Études Cognitives, École Normale Supérieure - PSL, Paris, France
> dInstitute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract 

Over the past decades, it has become increasingly clear that the complex morphology of cortical neurons is more than just a quirk of evolution, and that dendritic compartments serve as computational elements in their own right, rather than just providing connections between nerve cell bodies. While most computational studies discuss the enhanced representational capabilities of multi-compartment models as compared to point neurons, we focus here on the implications of neuronal morphology for synaptic plasticity. We argue that the ability of single neurons to simultaneously encode multiple pieces of information gives synapses local access to more than just the classical Hebbian pre- and postsynaptic terms, and with much greater specificity and reaction speed than permitted by other globally modulated factors. Based on a comparative review of recent dendritic learning models, we show how such neuronal compartmentalization can provide synapses with the means for calculating various forms of error signals, which in turn give rise to powerful real-time and fully local instantiations of deep learning through gradient descent. Implemented within cortical microcircuits capable of propagating and manipulating these errors, compartmentalized neurons thus ultimately enable the learning of far more complex tasks than are achievable by globally modulated Hebbian plasticity alone. 

Keywords: dendritic compartments, error-correcting plasticity, biological deep learning, cortical microcircuits 

Contents 1 Introduction 12 Implicit error representation 3

2.1 Learning by dendritic predictions of somatic spiking 32.2 Somato-dendritic consistency learning 52.3 Efficient learning of sequences 6

3 Explicit error representation 7

3.1 Dendritic error construction through local inhibition 73.2 Error neuron microcircuits 93.3 Global error broadcasting 11 3.4 Prospective coding for backpropagation through space and time 11 3.5 Bursting models 14 

4 Uncertainty representation 16 

4.1 Dendritic predictive plasticity performs er-ror correction and reliability matching 16 4.2 Uncertainty-modulated Prediction Errors 17 4.3 Dynamic uncertainty estimation 18 

5 Discussion 19 Acronyms 21 

> ∗Shared first authorship.

1. Introduction 

It is a common tenet in biology that evolutionary pres-sure often leads to highly optimized organisms. How-ever, features may appear as mere byproducts – span-drels (Gould and Lewontin, 1979) – of other adaptive characteristics or may vestigially persist over evolutionary timescales even when obsolete or clearly suboptimal, such as the infamous laryngeal nerve of the giraffe. Thus, the mere presence of individual features cannot in itself con-stitute a proof of their optimality, and even less so provide an account of their specific functional role. The complex morphology of neurons in the brain rep-resents a prominent feature which has raised such ques-tions about functionality, garnering increasing attention over the past few decades. While dendritic trees are obvi-ously required to connect single cells to a large number of presynaptic partners, and fulfill a role as cables for (elec-tric) signal transport (Häusser and Mel, 2003; Larkum, 2022), the interesting question relates to their computa-tional role in brain function. By now, it has become irrefutable that dendrites are not merely passive components, but play an active role in neuronal computation. In light of the ample evidence for various mechanisms of nonlinear dendritic processing, our picture of single neurons has undergone a radical shift, from simple point models to the equivalent of entire mul-tilayer, or even deep networks (Häusser and Mel, 2003; Poirazi et al., 2003; Gidon et al., 2020; Beniaguev et al., arXiv:2608.23251v2 [q-bio.NC] 25 Aug 2026 2021). However, while this explains how dendrites can be computationally useful , it does not account for why they might be computationally necessary . Indeed, the equiva-lence to deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) could be taken as a demonstration of the opposite, as these works do not show how networks of structured neurons can go in any way beyond what ANNs are already capable of do-ing with point neurons alone. The question of the neces-sity of dendrites has important implications not only for computational models of the brain, but also for artificial, brain-inspired computing, as it shapes our understanding of the biological primitives of computation. Here, we provide a different perspective on the role of dendrites, which ultimately highlights their role as nec-essary, rather than merely useful components for com-plex computation. Specifically, we suggest that their abil-ity to locally and simultaneously track multiple instruc-tive signals enables powerful local synaptic plasticity. To set up this perspective, let us return to ANNs and the workhorse of deep learning: error backpropagation (Lin-nainmaa, 1970; Werbos, 1982; Rumelhart et al., 1986). While undoubtedly effective, error backpropagation (BP) is manifestly nonlocal in space and time, as rightfully re-marked by early critics of BP as a model for learning in the brain (Crick, 1989). Nonlocality in space refers to the transport of distant errors to individual synapses, which requires feedback information to pass through feedforward synapses – otherwise known as the weight transport prob-lem. Nonlocality in time refers to error signals only becom-ing available after activity has fully propagated through-out a network, at a time when they might no longer match the currently present activity. These issues are only exac-erbated in backpropagation through time (BPTT; Pineda, 1987; Werbos, 1990), where activity needs to be played back through the same network, along with the calcula-tion of errors, but in reverse time. Thus, in absence of ad-ditional mechanisms, the functional proficiency attainable by networks of point neurons under BP remains inacces-sible to biological neuronal networks. For contrast, we can consider popular learning rules in classical computational neuroscience. The simplest such rule is due to Hebb and adapts synapses solely based on pre- and post-synaptic activity (Hebb, 1949). Prominent early work showed that networks instilled with Hebbian plasticity can learn to perform relatively complex compu-tational tasks. Some well-known examples include asso-ciative memory learning (Hopfield, 1982), self-organizing behavior (Kohonen, 1998), principal component analysis upon inclusion of a simple homeostatic term (Oja, 1982), and sampling-based Bayesian inference (Hinton and Se-jnowski, 1986; Hinton, 2002). However, these capabilities remain somewhat limited, especially in comparison with modern ANNs powered by deep learning. Significant additional power can be achieved by ex-tending classical Hebbian plasticity with a ‘third factor’, which modulates learning based on a globally available signal quantifying novelty, reward, or errors (reviewed ex-tensively in Frémaux and Gerstner, 2016; Kuśmierz et al., 2017; Gerstner et al., 2018). This has been shown to enable learning of patterns (Brea et al., 2013; Jimenez Rezende and Gerstner, 2014), aggregate label learning of speech (Gütig, 2016), and blind source separation of im-ages and movies (Isomura and Toyoizumi, 2016). However, such third factors usually represent the effect of neuro-modulators whose dynamics are governed by slow diffusion processes, which tend to act slowly and globally, with very limited spatial and temporal specificity, strongly limiting their capabilities (Gerstner et al., 2018). At this point, the next natural step appears to be the inclusion of additional learning rule components that have a greater degree of specificity. If these components are to evolve on the same time scales as neuronal signals, while also relating specifically to individual neurons, then the most natural physical locus of such components would be within the neurons themselves. Dendritic trees provide the required subdivision of neurons into compartments for separately storing these components. In this perspective article, we posit the view that the addition of dendritic compartments represents a necessary 

prerequisite for the instantiation of powerful, fully local, and phase-free learning. Thus, the search for a unique function of dendritic trees meets the search for a biologi-cally plausible substrate for deep learning, and two major outstanding challenges directly answer each other’s call. Along with fostering a better mechanistic understand-ing of computation and learning in biological brains, multi-compartment models also provide interesting components for the development of artificial brains. While superficial observation might suggest that effective cross-pollination between artificial and biological neural networks culmi-nates with receptive fields (Hubel and Wiesel, 1959; Hubel and Wiesel, 1962) and their applications in filtering (Fu-kushima, 1980) and CNNs (LeCun et al., 1989; LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2012), ANNs still have quite the gap to bridge towards their biological paragon, regarding both functional capabilities and the associated resource consumption. This suggests that there is still enormous potential for transfer of knowledge, especially with respect to the neuro-synaptic dynamics underlying computation. In particular, the remarkable levels of per-formance achieved by ANNs are only permitted by energy consumptions that exceed those of our brains by several orders of magnitude. Much of this comes down to infor-mation transport between different hardware components made necessary by nonlocal operations. The manifest lo-cality of synaptic learning rules enabled by dendritic struc-ture is set to close this gap. Compartmental models and associated plasticity rules are thus especially promising for neuromorphic system design. What follows is a systematic overview of neuronal plas-ticity models that use dendritic compartments to enable powerful synaptic learning rules. Our specific focus is on error-correcting plasticity and how it can be facilitated by dendrites. In order to organize the discussion, we separate these models into two classes, emphasizing error represen-tation. Specifically, we differentiate between models based 2on whether errors are represented explicitly in a dendritic compartment, as opposed to models where errors are only 

implicitly driving neuronal dynamics. The difference is easy to visualize from an experimental point of view: Mod-els with explicit error representation are those in which the errors are represented in specific neuronal compartments, which could in principle be measured directly by a suitable probe. Conversely, in models with implicit error represen-tation, errors still drive plasticity, but they are computed in the synapse from other postsynaptic signals. Thus, no experimental setup could probe a specific compartment to directly measure the value of the error signal. In addition to the explicit and implicit representation of errors , we also discuss a third class of models that take data uncer-tainty into account. Because sensory data is inherently variable, incorporating this information can be beneficial for learning, and compartmentalized neurons enable a cor-responding modulation of synaptic plasticity rules. In this work we do not explicitly distinguish between rate- and spike-based models, but rather focus on well-defined learning schemes with concrete experimental cor-relates and measurable metrics of functionality for a wide array of different models. We refer the reader to Box 1 for an introduction to the basic elements and notations common to all models. 

2. Implicit error representation 

In the following, we discuss a set of models based on two-compartment neurons, which provide the prerequi-sites for error-correcting three-factor plasticity rules. In all models, the somatic compartment encodes a target sig-nal of some form, and the dendritic compartment forms a prediction of the somatic activity. This somato-dendritic mismatch acts as an error signal, driving plasticity that minimizes it. The main differences between the models lie in the na-ture of the predicted quantity and in how the target signal is generated at the soma. In the US model (Section 2.1), an external teaching signal drives the soma through static synapses, and the dendrite learns to predict this target ac-tivity. Somato-dendritic consistency learning (Section 2.2) instead needs no external teacher: the soma normalizes its own membrane potential, and the mismatch with the un-normalized dendritic prediction drives unsupervised learn-ing of recurring patterns. Efficient learning of sequences (ELiSE) (Section 2.3) extends the US model to recurrent neural networks (RNNs), allowing latent neurons to pro-vide teaching signals to each other, in addition to those coming from external targets. 

2.1. Learning by dendritic predictions of somatic spiking 

As a first example of a learning algorithm where er-rors are computed locally and appear only implicitly, we consider the US model (Urbanczik and Senn, 2014). Here each neuron is modeled as having one somatic and one dendritic compartment. These compartments are inner-vated by soma-targeting and dendrite-targeting synapses with distinct properties and functional roles. Soma-targeting synapses are static and carry a teach-ing signal. As the somatic compartment is conductively coupled to the dendrite, in the absence of teaching in-put the somatic potential is fully driven by and will thus quickly approach that of the dendrite. In the presence of a teaching signal, the voltage of the soma is pulled away from the dendritic potential by the conductance-based teaching synapses. The learning rule adapts the dendrite-targeting synapses according to ∆W ∝ [φ(u) − φ(v∗)] rpre to mini-mize the postsynaptic error represented as the difference between the activity of the teacher-nudged soma φ(u) and the activity of the dendrite φ(v) (with rpre being the presy-naptic firing rate). In this and other related models, the learning rule needs a small but important correction in the dendritic term to account for the somatic leak. By setting v∗ =(glEl + gsd v)/(gl + gsd ), the dendritic term recovers the somatic potential in the absence of nudging, thereby al-lowing the unbiased representation of the teacher-induced error. Here, gl and gsd represent the leak and the somato-dendritic coupling conductances, and El the leak potential. This plasticity mechanism can endow recurrently con-nected networks with capabilities that are widely recog-nized as fundamental building blocks of cortical compu-tation (Urbanczik and Senn, 2014). For example, in an auto-associative memory task, different patterns can be imprinted onto a randomly connected recurrent network by having a teacher directly nudge the somata of the rele-vant neurons (Fig. 1a). The US rule allows the (recurrent) dendritic weights to adjust until the dendritic prediction matches the somatic potential, explaining away the effect of the teacher. The stored patterns thus become attrac-tors of the recurrent dynamics and a brief somatic nudge is enough to push the network into the corresponding sus-tained activity state. A second example involves the unsupervised learning of a self-organizing topographic map. Here, the plastic den-dritic synapses carry feedforward input from a stimulus layer, while the somatic nudging is supplied by the net-work itself through balanced short-range excitation and long-range inhibition via interneurons. Each neuron thus learns to predict neighboring activity while being pushed away from responses of distant neurons, creating a topo-graphic mapping in which correlated stimulus features are mapped to neighboring neurons, reminiscent of cortical feature maps. An extension by Brea et al. (2016) keeps the two-compartment US neuron model but modifies the tempo-ral properties of its plasticity rule. The somatic com-ponent is now driven by a low-pass-filtered, and hence lagged, presynaptic trace ¯rpre , resulting in the learning rule ∆W ∝ φ(u)¯ rpre − φ(v∗)rpre . To reach equilibrium, the dendrite then needs to learn to predict the expected future somatic activity. Importantly, when multiple presy-naptic inputs are present, the neuron can learn to predict its own predictions over behavioral time horizons. Since the somatic potential already contains the dendritic contri-bution, each newly learned anticipation becomes a target 3Box 1: Modeling background Variables and equations can either describe single neurons or population of neurons as u → u. Correspondingly, connections can be read as interactions between single neurons or between populations as W → W . Signals 

x ∈ { r, e }coming from lower areas in the cortical hierarchy are denoted by x↓ and signals coming from higher areas by x↑.

Definitions 

u membrane voltage - the state variable of a neuron that changes with synaptic input 

v dendritic voltage - the state variable of a neuron’s dendritic membrane 

τm membrane time constant - defines how fast a neuron reacts to input 

r neuronal output rate - usually a function of u with activation φ such that 

r(u) = φ(u), while some models use prospective outputs with r(u, ˙u) = φ(˘ u)

(see Box 3) 

e error - many models explicitly encode errors that can be computed by dendrites or specific error neurons 

W synaptic weights - connection strengths between pairs of neurons 

η learning rate - controls the amplitude of weight updates and thereby the speed of plasticity; often omitted for brevity 

Important concepts Multi-compartment leaky integration 

Cm ˙u = gl(El − u) + W r γ + G(v − u)

Cm ˙v = gl(El − v) + W r γ 

with membrane capacitance Cm, leak conduc-tance gl, and leak reversal potential El. Some models ignore the dendritic leak. W r γ repre-sents synaptic currents with weight matrix W

and presynaptic rate vector r, and G(v − u)

represents coupling to other compartments with coupling conductance matrix G. The factor γ

accounts for the type of synaptic interaction, with γ = 1 for current-based and γ = Erev − u

for conductance-based synapses. 

Delta rule: ∆W = η(r∗ − r)rpre 

synaptic weight updates depend on the presynap-tic rate rpre and the difference (delta) between the current neuronal output r and a target ac-tivity r∗. Most rules described here are a variant of the delta rule. 

Error propagation: e = r′ · W Te↑

This variant of error propagation is used in mod-ern AI algorithms and approximated by some models in this manuscript. Errors from upper layers e↑ are propagated downwards, using the transposed connection matrix W T and scaled by the derivative of the neuronal activation function 

r′ = φ′(u). Here, · denotes the Hadamard prod-uct. 

Prospective coding: ˘ur = u + τr ˙u

Some models use prospectivity to advance neu-ronal outputs, see Box 3 for more details. for further anticipation, and the learned activity expands backwards in time. This bootstrapping effect allows the neuron to learn a temporal prediction horizon that is much longer than the mere plasticity window. By associating the predicted signal with a reward, neurons can learn to predict a discounted future reward, relating this learning rule to the TD( λ) algorithm from reinforcement learning. The ability of a neuron to predict future inputs is re-ferred to as prospective coding. Here, prospectivity is not an intrinsic property of neuronal dynamics, but arises through a form of synaptic plasticity that is enabled by the neuron’s compartmentalization; we will return to a differ-ent variant of prospectivity in the context of deep learning in Section 3.4. 

Biology. The US model assumes a two-compartment neu-ronal structure in which dendritic inputs act as a pre-diction of somatic firing, while a separate teaching input nudges the somatic activity towards a target. The discrep-ancy between dendritic prediction and teacher-nudged so-matic representation then drives learning in the dendritic inputs. The dissociation between somatic and dendritic activ-ity, as required by US learning, is well-documented. Moore et al. (2017) found that dendritic spikes in freely behav-ing animals occur several-fold more frequently than so-matic spikes, with large sub-threshold dendritic voltage fluctuations. Further, Miles et al. (1996) showed that peri-somatic inhibition can strongly suppress somatic fir-ing while leaving dendritic responses comparatively intact. A second requirement is that plasticity is jointly gated by the local dendritic potential and by somatic activity. The dependence on local depolarization is well established, with evidence of the sign of plasticity being set by the level of postsynaptic depolarization (Artola et al., 1990; Sjöström et al., 2001). Regarding the availability of so-4prediction representation target error weights target output  latent a b ctarget Figure 1: Implicit error representation. (a) Urbanczik & Senn (US) neuron and synapse model (Urbanczik and Senn, 2014). Neurons are modeled as having two compartments, with the soma encoding the representation r and the dendrite encoding the prediction p of somatic spiking. Soma-targeting teacher synapses nudge the somatic activity towards a target t, generating an implicitly represented error signal            

> e=r−p.Plastic dendrite-targeting synapses are adjusted by a three-factor learning rule to minimize the difference between dendritic prediction and somatic target. Here, we also define the color code for our figures, which helps highlight common themes of neuronal coding and synaptic plasticity across all models. To this end, the depicted quantities are only symbolic and do not adhere to strict physical units, flexibly representing signals encoded by spikes, rates or membrane potentials. (b) Recurrent network with external teachers (Urbanczik and Senn, 2014). A target input is provided to all neurons in a recurrently connected population. Dendritic synapses adapt to produce predictions matching the targets. After learning, the network reproduces the target patterns on its own, in absence of the target input. (c)
> Recurrent network with external and internal teachers (ELiSE; Kriener et al., 2024). Here, signal transmission delays are actively used for sequence learning. Targets are presented only to the output population and propagate from there into the latent population via a sparse, static scaffold that emerges during network development. Synapses use the same learning rule as in (b), but here they learn to properly gate delayed activity, allowing the network to learn complex, non-Markovian target sequences.

matic activity, experiments have shown that action poten-tials propagate back into dendrites where they influence local calcium dynamics and the sign of synaptic plasticity (Sjöström and Häusser, 2006; Wright et al., 2025). Fur-ther experimental support for error-correcting learning in cortical microcircuits is discussed in Section 3. The cir-cumstantial evidence for the US model is thus quite di-verse, but both the predictive relationship between the two compartments and the specific plasticity mechanism of dendritic synapses have yet to be quantitatively mea-sured. A strong prediction of the model is that dendritic and somatic activity should co-evolve, simultaneously moving closer to each other and to the target signal – this is the essence of the somatic nudging principle. Also, with such convergence a neuron should become increasingly insensi-tive to removal of the teaching input. Experimental ver-ification of this long-term trend could thus exploit simul-taneous longitudinal recordings in the soma and dendrite (Gillon et al., 2024). Considering the US model for associative memory learning, there appear to be some correspondences to the architecture supporting such learning in hippocampal CA3 (Kesner, 2013). Pyramidal neurons in CA3 form a recur-rently connected network and receive strong mossy fiber input from dentate gyrus (DG) (Lisman, 1999). Consis-tent with the functional division between teaching and pre-dictive inputs in US learning, mossy fiber input gates plas-ticity at recurrent CA3 synapses through local dendritic NMDA spikes (Brandalise and Gerber, 2014; Brandalise et al., 2016). Plasticity itself depends on the relative tim-ing of the two pathways, yielding long-term potentiation (LTP) when CA3 recurrent input precedes mossy fiber in-put and long-term depression (LTD) when the order is reversed. This is compatible with a modified version of the US plasticity rule in which both dendritic and somatic activities leave short memory traces, for example by be-ing low-pass-filtered at the synapse. As mossy fibers are highly plastic themselves (Nicoll and Schmitz, 2005), this would correspond to teaching inputs in the US model that are variable in time. Importantly however, as predicted by removing the teacher in the US model, inactivation of mossy fiber synapses impairs spatial learning but not sub-sequent retrieval (Lassalle et al., 2000). 

2.2. Somato-dendritic consistency learning 

One core assumption of the original US learning rule is that the instantaneous activities produced by the dendrite and the soma are identical up to the difference elicited by a teaching signal available only to the soma. A more re-cent model breaks with this assumption, yielding a mech-anism for learning to detect patterns in an unsupervised way (Asabuki and Fukai, 2020). Here, unlike in other mod-els using US learning (Urbanczik and Senn, 2014; Brea et al., 2016; Kriener et al., 2024), the soma does not re-ceive teaching input. Instead, the discrepancy between the soma and the dendrite, which is crucial for learning, arises from differences in how the instantaneous firing rates of the soma φ(u) and the dendrite φ(v∗) are computed. As per usual in the dendritic compartment, the instanta-neous outputs are computed as φ(v∗). However, the soma applies the (sigmoid) activation to a normalization of its membrane potential. Specifically, it tracks both the run-ning mean μ and standard deviation σ of its membrane 5potential and uses these quantities to produce activity ac-cording to φ(ˆ u) where ˆu = u−μσ . As this normalization balances ˆu around 0, activity does not saturate and is al-ways in the steepest, most sensitive part of the activation function. To understand the implications of this adaptation, con-sider a single neuron whose dendrite receives irregular spik-ing input through small random weights. Whenever some of these input spikes coincide, the dendritic potential de-flects slightly. Because the somatic activity is constantly normalized, it is always sensitive even to small deviations, and the soma responds stronger to dendritic input than the dendrites alone would predict. As in the standard US rule, this mismatch triggers plasticity, but since the in-put spikes are random, none of the dendritic weights is systematically potentiated, and all weights remain small under weight decay. This changes when noisy inputs are interleaved with irregularly repeated frozen temporal pat-terns. Now, the same synapses are repeatedly engaged in the same order, and by adapting the input weights, the dendritic voltage can learn to approximate the somatic one. As learning progresses, the somatic response and hence its variance grows, which leads to an adaptation of the neuron’s activation function and stronger input – the input from the learned pattern – is now required to invoke the same output firing frequency. Thus, the initial noise sensitivity ultimately turns into a high pattern selectivity. Since the pattern selected by a neuron is arbitrary, di-versity of learned patterns is enforced by lateral inhibi-tion, which leads to the formation of clusters of neurons which preferentially respond to diverse structures in an input. This property can be leveraged to train networks to perform temporal feature segmentation tasks including learning of orientation tunings and detection of temporal communities. 

2.3. ELiSE 

The ELiSE model adapts the US learning rule for se-quence learning in recurrent neural networks (Kriener et al., 2024). Sequence learning is a difficult task, especially in the case of non-Markovian sequences, where the next state depends not just on the current state, but on some portion of the history of past states (e.g., the sequence A B A C ). Accordingly, for successful learning, networks need to store memories of past states in their dynamics and shape them in a way that is helpful towards producing the desired output sequence. In ELiSE, as in other models, this is achieved via a re-currently connected latent population connected to an out-put population. As evidenced by the limited capabilities of reservoir models, only adapting output weights is not efficient for learning complex temporal patterns (Vlachas et al., 2020). To fully harness the RNN’s capabilities for learning complex patterns, the ELiSE model goes beyond training of only the readout weights, and constructs a learning signal also for the recurrent connections. Recall that US learning requires each synapse to have local access to three quantities: the neuron activity in absence of the teacher (dendritic voltage), the activity in its presence (so-matic voltage) and a trace of presynaptic activities. The challenge in the RNN setting is to provide useful targets for latent neurons. Ideally these should be structured so that temporal information is distributed spatially inside the network, with some neurons containing memories of past states around which the rest of the network can adapt to produce the correct outputs. To achieve this combina-tion of structure and plasticity, two types of connections are introduced, both of which are associated with delays. During an initial developmental phase a sparse scaffold of soma-targeting connections (the orange connections in Fig. 1) is formed. These connections remain fixed dur-ing learning and thus propagate targets from the output into the latent population in a structured way. Intuitively, the scaffold translates temporal information into spatial information. During the subsequent learning phase, a dense ma-trix of dendrite-targeting synapses (green connections in Fig. 1) adapts so that neurons learn to spontaneously re-produce the target present at the soma. As in the original US model, the errors that drive learning are (implicitly) computed as the difference between target (somatic) and predicted (dendritic) activities. Once learning has con-verged, both latent and output neurons are driven onto their targets by dendritic inputs, thus rendering teaching input obsolete. Accordingly, the network is able to replay the sequence robustly in the absence of teaching input. The use of dendrites endows ELiSE with measurable advantages over other models for biologically plausible re-current weight learning (Gilra and Gerstner, 2017; Sussillo and Abbott, 2009; Maes et al., 2020). One set of advan-tages derives from the inherent spatial and temporal lo-cality of learning in each synapse in ELiSE. One way in which related models achieve similar locality is to make er-ror signals computed at the output nearly instantaneously available to synapses in the network (Sussillo and Abbott, 2009; Gilra and Gerstner, 2017). Another approach is to store activities produced by la-tent neurons in the form of an eligibility trace until errors have propagated back from the output – see Murray (2019) and Bellec et al. (2020) for rate- and spike-based versions of such eligibility-based approximations to real-time recur-rent learning (RTRL) (Williams and Zipser, 1989), as well as Section 3.4 for a more in-depth discussion. However, both the instantaneous transportation of errors and the storage of complex eligibility traces are difficult to recon-cile with biology. Importantly, both approaches are in-compatible with the presence of transmission delays. In contrast, ELiSE shows how delays can help drastically de-crease the neuronal real-estate required for learning, al-lowing networks with as few as 30 latent neurons learn long complex non-Markovian sequences efficiently and ro-bustly. This compares favorably to the thousands of la-tent neurons required by models relying on the slowness of neuronal dynamics alone (Sussillo and Abbott, 2009; Gilra and Gerstner, 2017) or long carefully calibrated transition chains (Maes et al., 2020) to retain memories of past in-6puts. 

Biology. As birdsong is a prominent example of pattern learning and replay, ELiSE lends itself as a mechanis-tic model for understanding birdsong learning in zebra finches. As juveniles, zebra finches learn a single song based on that of their tutor (Bolhuis and Gahr, 2006; Hahnloser and Kotowicz, 2010). During learning, activ-ity in pre-motor area RA becomes increasingly self-similar (Ölveczky et al., 2011; Okubo et al., 2015). Similarly, in ELiSE, learning structures the activity in the latent pop-ulation until it becomes almost identical across iterative replays. Furthermore, due to the teaching scaffold, teach-ing signals in the model are structured from the beginning of learning. Similarly, it has been shown that songbirds are born with a species-specific template that is refined through listening to the tutor (Konishi, 1965; Gobes and Bolhuis, 2007; Bolhuis and Moorman, 2015). As in ELiSE, once learning has converged, the removal of the teacher has no impact on replay. Likewise, once a bird has crys-tallized its adult song, the removal of areas encoding the tutor song impairs the recognition of the tutor song but not the song production (Gobes and Bolhuis, 2007). Finally, there seems to be a correspondence in the way ELiSE and birdsong learning utilize sources of unstruc-tured random activity to improve learning. At the on-set of learning, the randomly initialized teaching synapses weakly propagate activities. With learning, connections that contribute to correct replay are singled out and re-inforced. In songbirds, the source of this variability is the lateral magnocellular nucleus of the ant. nidopallium (LMAN), which projects onto pre-motor area RA (Kao et al., 2005; Aronov et al., 2008). Where LMAN-driven variation shapes the produced song, subcortical structures are thought to trigger plasticity that subsequently biases LMAN towards the activity patterns that proved useful (Fee and Goldberg, 2011; Gadagkar et al., 2016). All-in-all, these correspondences between the ELiSE model and song learning point to the interplay of structure and ran-domness as a general requirement for sequence learning systems. Here, the presence of dendrites plays a crucial role in separating the structures useful for propagating teaching signals (via the static sparse teacher scaffold) from the initially random somato-dendritic connections that enable flexibility during learning. 

3. Explicit error representation 

In models where errors are represented explicitly, mis-matches between expected and observed stimuli are di-rectly accessible as measurable quantities. In hierarchical 

models of the cortex, these theories are often closely re-lated to deep learning models. With explicit error repre-sentations, network performance can be measured by syn-apses through the magnitude of local error signals. This represents an explicit form of credit assignment, as by in-fluencing local errors, synapses can ultimately have an ef-fect on the global network output. Most of the models in this category are based on a tripartite neuron model: Inspired by the morphology of cortical pyramidal neurons, the core computational units consist of a prediction dendrite integrating afferent input and therefore encode the currently learned internal repre-sentation. A second compartment locally encodes an error signal and is, depending on the strength of the coupling between the error compartment and the soma, weakly or strongly nudged towards the intended representation. Loosely speaking, the prediction dendrite encodes what the neuron thinks it should do and the soma encodes what the neuron should actually do, as dictated by the target output. This mismatch is picked up and gradually reduced by error-correcting learning rules similar to those discussed above. The differences between the models in this section lie primarily in the type of teaching signal being provided at the error compartment, the nudging strength and the error transport mechanism across hierarchies. Information representation and learning rules are further shaped by the specific temporal dynamics of each neuron model. Depending on whether models focus on generative (e.g., pattern completion) or discriminative (pattern recognition) properties of cortex, predictions can flow ei-ther from primary sensory to higher-order areas or vice versa. While few models address both pathways simulta-neously (however, see Deperrois et al., 2022), it is probably the case that cortex does both. Error transport across cortical areas varies substan-tially between models: Models of dendritic error construc-tion (Section 3.1) do not transmit the error as a sepa-rate signal but reconstruct it locally at each area from the mismatch between incoming projections and interneuron predictions, so only the combined signal r = p + e trav-els between areas. Error neuron microcircuits (ENMCs) (Section 3.2) use a dedicated population of error neurons that propagates errors from area to area alongside a sepa-rate representation pathway, extending the compartment-free, two-population circuit of Whittington and Bogacz (2017) that mirrors backpropagation. Deep feedback con-trol (DFC) broadcasts a centrally computed mismatch sig-nal to all areas at once, approximating a second-order, Gauss-Newton solution to credit assignment. Bursting models instead multiplex activity and error onto a sin-gle output channel, using isolated spikes and bursts to carry each signal separately (Payeur et al., 2021; Greedy et al., 2022). Latent equilibrium (LE) and its extensions (GLE, VLE) act on the transport mechanism itself, gen-eralizing it to prospective communication, in which neu-rons signal anticipated future states rather than present ones. This overcomes the relaxation problem and solves spatio-temporal credit assignment by approximating non-local-in-time future errors, mapping onto either dendritic cortical microcircuits (dendritic CMCs) or ENMCs. 

3.1. Dendritic error construction through local inhibition 

Models of dendritic error construction compute the lo-cal error directly within a representation neuron’s den-7dritic compartment, rather than receiving it from a ded-icated population of error neurons as in Section 3.2: the same neuron that uses the error for its own plasticity is also the one that constructs it. Here, we discuss three rate-based models of error signal construction through local inhibition: dendritic backprop-agation (dendritic BP) by Sacramento et al. (2018), den-dritic target propagation (dendritic TP) by Galloni et al. (2026), and dendritic hierarchical predictive coding (den-dritic hPC) by Mikulasch et al. (2023) (see also Fig. 2a,b). Dendritic BP and dendritic TP operate as discriminative models, whereas dendritic hPC is generative, but other-wise they essentially carry out the same error propagation and learning algorithm. Inverting the area/population hi-erarchy of dendritic hPC yields the architecture of the other two models (see also Max et al., 2026, Appendix C). The idea of introducing separate dendritic compart-ments to store different quantities (sensory information and higher-order feedback) for deep credit assignment was first proposed in Guerguiev et al. (2017). Here too, the er-ror was represented only implicitly, in the temporal differ-ence between a neuron’s feedforward- and feedback-driven phase. The models described in this section are modified as to remove the need for such phases and better align with continuously active plasticity. Motivated by mechanisms of excitatory-inhibitory bal-ance between pyramidal and interneurons in cortex (De-nève and Machens, 2016), errors are hypothesized to be computed in dendritic compartments from mismatches be-tween the activities of representation neurons and interneu-rons. This makes the error signals locally available to the neuron, without the need for a separate population of error neurons. The models achieve this by representing pyrami-dal cells as three-compartment neurons, and using a local population of interneurons. The working principle is sketched in Figure 2a and b. When presenting a stimulus in absence of a learning sig-nal, the network settles into a state where both the pyra-midal cells and interneurons encode the same predictions. The horizontal pyramidal-to-interneuron projections are adapted such that the error-representing compartments e

of pyramidal cells have zero activity, i.e., interneuron i

and afferent pyramidal cell activity r cancel out exactly. In the models, such matching of activity is referred to as ‘tight balance’ (Mikulasch, 2023) or the ‘self-predicting state’ (Sacramento et al., 2018), and is facilitated by local learning rules. These adjust lateral, interneuron-targeting connections, based on representations from other (down-stream) areas to match the forward weights. After es-tablishing such a balanced state, an error signal can be introduced in one area of the network. Now, the activ-ity of pyramidal neurons in this area encodes a mixture of predictions and error signals, symbolically: r = p + e.This signal is projected to pyramidal cells in other areas (central boxes in Fig. 2a,b). Because interneurons still only encode predictions, the difference between afferent projections from pyramidal cells in other areas and local interneuron activity is precisely the backpropagated error from other areas: e = r↑ − p for dendritic BP and den-dritic TP, or e = r↓ − p for dendritic hPC. Hence, the compartment voltage e encodes an explicit error signal. This mechanism allows error signals to be projected across areas, on top of the prediction signals. Dendritic BP and dendritic TP rely on this same mech-anism and, since e = r − p, arrive at algebraically identi-cal weight updates. Although named after target propa-gation (TP), dendritic TP reconstructs this top-down er-ror in the same indirect way as dendritic BP, from the mismatch between nudged and unnudged, prediction-only activity, rather than via an explicit inverse mapping of targets through the network as in classical TP. Its main differences from dendritic BP instead lie in incorporating lateral inhibition, Dale’s-law-compliant connectivity and eligibility traces. The weights connecting representation neurons across areas are adapted to minimize the locally reconstructed er-ror signal, using a delta rule of the form ∆W = ( r −p)×r↓

(dendritic BP, dendritic TP), or ∆W = ( r − p) × r↑ (den-dritic hPC). With the appropriate mechanisms described above and under the assumption of small errors, these learning rules have been shown to approximate BP (Sacra-mento et al., 2018), and have further been related to the error propagation mechanism of Difference Target Prop-agation (Lee et al., 2015; Max et al., 2024). One of the underlying assumptions is weight symmetry between for-ward and backward pathways, also known as the weight transport problem (see Box 2). While simulation results have demonstrated that den-dritic error construction can solve non-linear classification problems (Sacramento et al., 2018; Haider et al., 2021; Max et al., 2024; Galloni et al., 2026), these models rely on strong assumptions such as a perfect cancellation of in-hibitory and pyramidal activity in absence of external tar-gets (see also the Biology section), and extremely slowly varying input (or dedicated relaxation phases otherwise). This relaxation problem is shared with Equilibrium Prop-agation (Scellier and Bengio, 2017) and requires further mechanisms to plausibly scale to more complex problems (Haider et al., 2021) (see also Section 3.4). It also remains unclear whether dendritic error construction through lo-cal inhibition can scale to propagate useful error signals across more than two areas (Max et al., 2026). 

Biology. Such models of dendritic error construction re-quire tight matching of interneuron and pyramidal cell ac-tivity. This fits well with observations of strong correlation between stimulus-evoked excitation and inhibition in cor-tex (Wehr and Zador, 2003; Okun and Lampl, 2008), even at the dendritic level (Liu, 2004). The excitatory units are assumed to be pyramidal cells (e.g., in cortical layers 2/3, Mikulasch et al., 2023), each projecting their predic-tions to up- and downstream areas (Fig. 1a,b). Inhibitory neurons are required to project locally onto the dendrites of pyramidal cells. As candidates, somatostatin-positive (SST) interneurons have been discussed in Sacramento et al. (2018), as they preferentially target apical dendrites of pyramidal cells, in line with the model’s assumption. Al-8ternatively, parvalbumin-positive (PV) basket cells have been proposed, due to their ability to quickly inhibit so-mata and basal dendrites of pyramidal cells with fast spik-ing (Mikulasch et al., 2023). However, the tight matching condition is rather strict: it requires close correspondence between interneurons and pyramidal cells, both in connectivity and activity. This does not necessarily need to hold at the level of individual cells and synapses, since populations of interneurons could instead learn to match populations of pyramidal cells, leav-ing some freedom for individual units, but dendrites still require the average match to hold closely enough for lo-cal error signals to be computed. Given that interneurons non-linearly integrate inputs from different cells (Cornford et al., 2019), such a tight matching is still difficult to rec-oncile with biological evidence. Models of dendritic error construction have distinct ex-perimental signatures. Foremost, as discussed above, in-terneurons should closely match pyramidal cell activity in absence of prediction errors, at least at the popula-tion level. Further, error signals are encoded in either basal (Mikulasch et al., 2021) or distal apical (Sacramento et al., 2018; Galloni et al., 2026) dendrites of pyramidal cells, and somata integrate error signals with predictions from other pyramidal cells. Detailed experimental valida-tion would thus make it necessary to record simultaneously from dendrites and somata during learning , a technique for which only few datasets exist (e.g., Gillon et al., 2024). 

3.2. Error neuron microcircuits 

In the models discussed above, pyramidal neurons in the forward pathway are paired with interneurons that can also be considered as being part of the same pathway, and their difference represents the (backpropagated) error; backward propagation thus happens only implicitly, with-out a dedicated backward pathway. By contrast, in error neuron microcircuits, errors are represented explicitly and propagated backward by a separate class of pyramidal er-ror neurons that form an explicit backward pathway, an idea first suggested in the two-population predictive cod-ing circuit of Whittington and Bogacz (2017). Lateral projections from these error neurons to the dendrites of representation neurons in the forward pathway then al-low the same dendritic representation of errors for error-correcting learning as in Section 3.1, only now inherited directly from an explicit error neuron population rather than computed locally. More recently, such a symmetric microcircuit was pro-posed as a substrate for the generalized latent equilib-rium (GLE) framework (Ellenberger et al., 2025, see Sec-tion 3.4), and extended with a detailed study in (Max et al., 2026). This error neuron microcircuit (ENMC) model of cortex is illustrated in Figure 2c. The ENMC model improves on the biological plausibility of previous mod-els by considering a more general connectivity than the often-assumed strict hierarchy we have seen until now; it also lifts the strict one-to-one coupling and self-predicting-state matching discussed in Section 3.1. It demonstra-bly approximates BP for learning in rate-based networks, and also enables the approximation of backpropagation through time (BPTT) for temporal credit assignment (El-lenberger et al., 2025). The computational advantage of explicit error neurons is that they allow an even closer correspondence to arti-ficial networks trained with BP compared to error calcu-lation in dendrites. In the ENMC model, the two oppos-ing pathways of inference vs. error backpropagation are implemented at the circuit level: representation neurons (upwards in Fig. 2c) project directly to representation neu-rons in other areas; errors are passed (downwards) directly from error neuron to error neuron – this differentiates the model from classical predictive coding (PC), where all pro-jections are bidirectional (Max et al., 2026). As in PC, error signals are explicitly coded in the output of error neurons. These errors are constructed by multiplying af-ferent errors from higher areas e↑, with a gating signal from local prediction units, implementing the BP compu-tation e = r′ · W Te↑. Such gating is implemented by mod-eling error cells with two compartments, multiplying local predictions r′ with afferent errors W Te↑. As in previous models, this error propagation assumes a form of weight transport, for which biologically plausible plasticity mech-anisms exist (see Box 2). Similar to the pyramidal cells in dendritic error con-struction models (Sacramento et al., 2018; Mikulasch et al., 2023), each representation neuron has three compart-ments: one compartment accumulating predictions p from representation neurons in other areas; an error-receiving compartment, onto which local error neurons project – this makes the error e available to the representation neuron; and a somatic compartment encoding the representation r,which integrates predictions and errors from its adjacent dendrites. Learning is facilitated by a variant of the delta rule, in which representation neurons use prediction errors 

r − p as a learning signal for plasticity ∆W ∝ (r − p)r↓.The ENMC model addresses several issues of biologi-cal plausibility commonly found in theories of learning in cortex. As opposed to other PC models – Rao and Bal-lard (1999), Mikulasch et al. (2021), and Sacramento et al. (2018), see also Mikulasch et al. (2023) for a review – there is no strict one-to-one matching of neurons in different populations; instead, the model can learn with only loose matching between representation and error units, and dif-ferent sizes of each population. This flexibility extends to the hierarchy of areas itself, matching the more complex architectures observed in, for instance, the macaque vi-sual cortex (Markov et al., 2014). In Max et al. (2026), the capabilities of ENMCs have been demonstrated on var-ious learning tasks, which require errors to be propagated across multiple areas. 

Biology. The ENMC postulates two populations of pyra-midal cells to serve as prediction and error units, located in cortical layers L5 and L2/3 respectively. Recent physi-ological measurements suggest that cortical L2/3 pyrami-dal cells may serve as error coding neurons, with evidence from various cortical areas, such as visual (Thomas et al., 9ba c d

reprepprepi i

repirepipepiFigure 2: Error representations in cortical microcircuits. In all microcircuit models, pyramidal neurons have a similar structure. Dendritic errors e nudge somatic representations r away from dendritic predictions p, allowing synapses access to the necessary information in order to instantiate a form of the error-correcting delta rule ∆W ∝ (r−p)rpre = er pre . (a) In models of dendritic backpropagation (Sacramento et al., 2018; Haider et al., 2021; Max et al., 2024) and target propagation (Galloni et al., 2026), inhibitory interneurons learn to copy predictions of the area above p↑ through teacher synapses coming from those areas (dashed arrow). In the error compartments of pyramidal cells, interneuron activity is subtracted from inter-area projections r, forming a local error representation: e = α(r↑ − p↑) = αe ↑. The proportionality factor α = φ′W T is determined by the derivative of the top-down neuronal firing rate φ′ and the top-down synaptic weights 

W T, yielding an approximation of the BP algorithm. See Box 2 for a discussion of how backward weights can become transposes W T

of the forward weights. (b) Dendritic hierarchical predictive coding (Mikulasch et al., 2023) employs the same error coding and synaptic plasticity mechanism, but applied to an inverted hierarchy of areas. The dendritic compartments are effectively swapped with respect to (a), with the basal dendrite now representing the error e and the apical dendrite representing the prediction p. (c) In dendritic error neuron microcircuits (Ellenberger et al., 2025; Max et al., 2026; Brandt et al., 2026), there are two populations of pyramidal cells: error neurons (left) and representation neurons (right). Representation neurons are directly connected, forming a prediction stream across areas (blue, upwards). Similarly, error neurons directly project to each other (red, downwards). Local connectivity allows error neurons to project their activities onto apical dendritic compartments of representation neurons. The factors W T and φ′ are separately transported towards error neurons by top-down synapses from other error neurons and horizontal connections from representation neurons, respectively. (d) Global error broadcasting models (Meulemans et al., 2021; Meulemans et al., 2022) do not propagate errors layer-by-layer, but use a global controller in the top layer to adapt local errors in every layer in a way that reduces the top layer error. Here, the same error-correcting plasticity rule as in the other models yields an approximation of Gauss-Newton optimization, rather than BP. 

2024; Zmarz and Keller, 2016; Makino and Komiyama, 2015; Jordan and Keller, 2020; Gillon et al., 2024), visuo-motor (Attinger et al., 2017), motor (Ebina et al., 2018), and auditory cortex (Obara et al., 2023). L5 pyramidal cells acting as prediction units need to integrate afferent across-area predictions with local error signals. There-fore, a strong correlation between L5 and L2/3 pyrami-dal cells within the same area should be observed during learning; after learning or during inference, however, L2/3 error units should be silent, and L5 activity fully stimulus-driven. The ENMC model has distinct inter-area connectivity: it posits two separate, opposing streams of predictions and errors, which project separately across areas, but couple to each other within each area (Fig. 2c; red vs. blue streams). Such distinct feed-forward and feedback pathways have been mapped out across cortical areas (Markov et al., 2014). However, projections of explicit error signals across multiple areas have yet to be experimentally confirmed; in fact, an ongoing study by the OpenScope initiative sug-gests that error signals are only partially projected across higher-order areas (Westerberg et al., 2025). This directly challenges non-dendritic hierarchical PC models (Rao and Ballard, 1999; Whittington and Bogacz, 2017), which re-quire errors to be computed and propagated forward at every level of the hierarchy, but is compatible with the ENMC model, where predictions, not errors, drive feed-forward sensory processing. In the model, neurons have dendritic compartments with dynamics tailored to the computations they need to implement. Similar to models of dendritic error construc-tion (Section 3.1), L5 pyramidal cells represent predictions and errors in separate dendritic compartments, e.g., basal / perisomatic and distal apical dendrites. This means that error signals are accessible as separate quantities within the neuron, and should be observable through dendrite-specific recordings. On the other hand, L2/3 pyramidal cells represent error-dependent activity in their somata, with the dendritic compartment acting as a gating / gain-modulating factor. Potential biophysical implementations of this gating include a non-linear dendrite, gain modu-lation through the shunting of synaptic conductances, or 10 short-term synaptic plasticity. Experimentally, the ENMC model can be distinguished from models of dendritic error construction through such architectural details: instead of tight matching between interneuron and pyramidal cells, there is explicit error coding in L2/3 neurons. 

3.3. Global error broadcasting 

Global error broadcasting was first explored in the ma-chine learning (ML) context through direct feedback align-ment (Nøkland, 2016), an extension of feedback align-ment (Lillicrap et al., 2016) that projects the network’s output error directly to every layer via a fixed random matrix, instead going sequentially through every layer. Taking inspiration from control theory, Meulemans et al. (2021) cast this broadcasting principle as a genuine dy-namical system, the DFC framework, which approximates a second-order solution to the credit assignment problem and, as with the models already discussed, maps natu-rally onto a multi-compartment dendritic neuron model, as detailed below. They suggest a proportional-integral-derivative (PID) feedback controller that computes a sin-gle mismatch signal (equivalent to the output error in BP), which is then directly projected to all areas in the network at once. On the neuronal level, DFC is largely identical to the pyramidal neuron model of (Sacramento et al., 2018; Hai-der et al., 2021; Mikulasch et al., 2023; Max et al., 2026): each neuron has three compartments: a feedforward (pre-diction), feedback (control signal) and somatic compart-ment (see Fig. 2c). The soma additively integrates pre-dictions p and control signals e into the neuron’s activ-ity r. Hence, errors are explicitly represented, both in form of the feedback controller, and in the feedback com-partments of each neuron. To update feedforward weights, the same error-correcting learning rule as in Sacramento et al. (2018) is used, such that ∆W ∝ (r−p)r↓. This approx-imates Gauss-Newton optimization for a flexible range of feedback weights. Separately, DFC proposes an additional noise-based learning rule to adapt these feedback weights during training. DFC offers two further advantages over previous mod-els, in terms of biological plausibility. Usual bio-plausible approaches of implementing BP or PC carry over the no-tion that errors need to be propagated through all ar-eas (Rao and Ballard, 1999; Sacramento et al., 2018; Miku-lasch et al., 2023, see Fig. 2), which, in their original for-mulation, require symmetric connectivity, both in terms of size and distance of projections. This can, however, be relaxed, as shown in Max et al. (2026), especially by combining such models with a learned weight-alignment mechanism (Max et al., 2024; Gierlich et al., 2026, see also Box 2). Such connectivity, whether symmetric or learned, nonetheless contradicts what is observed in visual cortex, where feedback projections do not mirror feedfor-ward ones (Markov et al., 2014). DFC instead requires no such connectivity by construction, allowing for direct feed-back connections to all lower areas and thus providing a better match for the broadly connected feedback patterns observed in cortex. Combined with a microcircuit motif incorporating local inhibitory interneurons, DFC no longer requires a dedicated error compartment (Rossbroich and Zenke, 2023). Further, Aceituno et al. (2023) have demonstrated that DFC is also applicable to spiking models. However, the authors criticize the biological plausibility of the underly-ing US learning rule. They argue that it is unclear how a neuron may compute the difference of activity between its compartments, and transfer the result to the correct synapse. Instead of using differences between activities in neuronal compartments, Aceituno et al. propose to use the 

temporal change in neuronal activity as a learning signal. However, this comes at the cost of slow learning, and it re-mains to be demonstrated whether their temporal Hebbian learning rule can scale to train large spiking networks. A follow-up study extends DFC to strong feedback con-trol, in which the control signal has a strong influence on the activity of representation neurons: r = p + e, with 

e ≫ p (Meulemans et al., 2022). This is opposed to usual derivations that relate plasticity rules to gradient descent – effectively all other models in this section – which only approximate the loss gradient as the feedback vanishes, i.e., for e ≪ p, also called the weak nudging limit (Xie and Seung, 2003; Scellier and Bengio, 2017; Haider et al., 2021; Senn et al., 2024; Sacramento et al., 2018; Max et al., 2026). In the strong nudging case, learning is instead reframed as minimizing the amount of feedback control needed to reach the target, which allows the simultaneous learning of forward and feedback weights without relying on the weak-nudging assumption. 

Biology. As noted above, DFC’s three-compartment ar-chitecture and learning rule already coincide with those described in Section 3.1. The extension of DFC to strong feedback control, as described above, also enhances its bi-ological plausibility: an analysis (Aceituno et al., 2024) of in vitro and in vivo recordings suggests that cortical neu-rons are strongly influenced by targets during learning, aligning with the strong control hypothesis. A stronger control signal is also more robust to temporal noise, an arguably intrinsic property of biological substrates. 

3.4. Prospective coding for backpropagation through space and time 

If learning requires settling to an equilibrium, models face a fundamental obstacle towards biological plausibility – the so-called relaxation problem. When representations and errors are misaligned in time, error-correcting plastic-ity can guide synapses in the wrong direction and learning can be substantially impaired. If neurons are only capable of laggy signal transmission due to the low-pass-filtering effect of membrane integration, such misalignment is in-evitable, especially when both predictions and errors need to be transmitted across multiple stages of the cortical hierarchy. Models such as (Rao and Ballard, 1999; Sacra-mento et al., 2018; Mikulasch et al., 2023; Scellier and Bengio, 2017) solve the problem by introducing explicit re-laxation times after each sensory input, during which the 11 Box 2: The weight transport problem in biologically plausible credit assignment The weight transport problem, coined by Grossberg (1987), identifies a core implausibility of the backprop-agation algorithm (Crick, 1989; Whittington and Bo-gacz, 2019; Lillicrap et al., 2020): According to the recursive error backpropagation rule e = r′ · W Te↑,feedback pathways need to carry the exact transpose 

W T of the forward weights. This constraint requires further attention as no mechanism in biology is known that can directly copy weight information between syn-apses. It affects all algorithms for biologically plausible BP presented here. Algorithms from the feedback alignment (FA) fam-ily (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Nøkland, 2016) circumvent this problem by replacing W T by random fixed feed-back matrix B. Despite the observation that for-ward weights tend to align with the random feedback weights, several studies have demonstrated that FA alone performs poorly in deeper networks and when tackling more challenging tasks (Bartunov et al., 2018; Moskovitz et al., 2018). To address this issue, several weight symmetrization algorithms have been proposed. Liao et al. (2016) have shown that it is the sign of feedback weights rather than their magnitude that needs to be aligned for meaningful error transport. The approach pro-posed by Kolen and Pollack (1994) and mapped to a microcircuit structure in Akrout et al. (2019) em-ploys weight decay on forward and backward synapses to forget their initial state while updating both path-ways with symmetric weight updates. However, this relegates the weight transport problem to a weight up-date transport problem, and it remains unclear how these symmetric updates can be achieved given the om-nipresent temporal noise and morphological variability in neuronal substrates. More recent algorithms try to infer information about a synapse’s reciprocal counterpart from neuronal ac-tivity. Both phaseless alignment learning (PAL; Max et al., 2024) and its spiking counterpart spike-based alignment learning (SAL; Gierlich et al., 2026) exploit noise to estimate the effect of distant weights. Other methods such as regression discontinuity design (Guer-guiev et al., 2019) and spike-timing-dependent weight inference (Ahmad et al., 2020) propose to infer the strength of forward weights through a specific stimu-lation protocol for the corresponding pre- and postsy-naptic neurons. input needs to remain unchanged. These can quickly be-come biologically implausible, considering the speed with which sensory information can change. Latent equilibrium (LE; Haider et al., 2021) proposes a solution to the relaxation problem by harnessing prospec-tive coding at the level of individual neurons. Prospective neurons fire in anticipation of their future input (on a time scale of τr) by modulating their output not only as a func-tion of their membrane potential, but also of its temporal derivative: φ(˘ u) = φ(u + τr ˙u).LE network dynamics are derived from first princi-ples. Neuron dynamics follow from conservation of a global energy function that accumulates neuron-local en-ergies across the entire network. Each of these relate to neuron-local errors e = ˘ u − W r pre that effectively repre-sent a difference between what a neuron does and what its presynaptic partners think it should do. With this, the two main differences from classical PC become appar-ent: there, neuron dynamics follow gradient descent on an energy (rather than conservation) and errors are defined on instantaneous (as opposed to prospective) membrane potentials. Since the model does both predictive coding (acquired through synaptic plasticity across the modeled hierarchy) and prospective coding (as an intrinsic property of neu-ronal dynamics), the two effects can easily be confused. For clarity, the difference is summarized in Box 3. The network architecture that implements the sought neuronal dynamics was originally mapped to the dendritic CMC model (Section 3.1), with apical dendrites construct-ing errors from differences in pyramidal and interneuron activities. It can, however, also be interpreted in terms of the ENMC model (Section 3.2), with errors computed by distinct population of error neurons. As a consequence of prospectivity, the transmitted errors and predictions are virtually instantaneous, and thus impervious to quickly changing sensory input. LE can thus achieve the same performance as BP in ANNs, but with fully local, biolog-ically plausible plasticity and without the need for relax-ation phases. The specific choice of the prospective time scale consti-tutes the main limitation of LE: because the prospective output exactly cancels the neuron’s membrane integra-tion, no information about the past is retained, precluding any task that requires memory. Many sensory processing tasks, however, require memory well beyond a single neu-ron’s membrane time constant (a few tens of milliseconds) – for instance, on the order of hundreds of milliseconds for the fast processing of movement or sound. To extend LE towards temporal processing, generalized latent equi-librium (GLE; Ellenberger et al., 2025) decouples the time constants of the prospective output and the membrane fil-tering, thus enabling it to attend to different time horizons lying either in its past (retrospective coding, τr < τ m) or in its future (prospective coding, τr > τ m). Memory alone, however, does not solve temporal credit assignment, which requires computing gradients through time, much as BP does across space. BPTT generalizes BP to temporal tasks by unrolling the recurrent compu-tation over time into an equivalent feedforward network 12 Box 3: Predictive vs. prospective coding 

Predictive coding 

Predictive coding encompasses a wide range of mod-els for cortical hierarchies in which higher-level areas try to predict the states of lower-level areas. Unpre-dictable or novel input leads to neuronal activity that is propagated upwards as an error. Error neurons encode the mismatch between true and predicted activities and gate the information flow throughout the network. During learning, connections between neurons are up-dated such that this mismatch is minimized. Thus, after learning has converged, error neuron activity is greatly diminished. Such models are often used for ex-plaining the representation of static visual stimuli in cortex. 

Prospective coding 

Prospective coding refers to a neuron’s ability to an-ticipate its own near-future state. This can either be achieved through synaptic plasticity or as an intrinsic property of neuronal dynamics. In the latter case, this anticipation is due to various ionic currents that couple negatively into the membrane equation. This can be simplified by considering an activation that depends on both the membrane potential and its derivative: 

r = φ(˘ u) = φ(u + τ ˙u). The prospective time constant 

τ controls the time scale of the anticipation. Different combinations of membrane and prospective time con-stants allow neurons to attend to different time frames in both their past and their future. with shared weights, on which BP is then applied directly. In practice, this requires storing and replaying each neu-ron’s past activations in reverse. This anticausal mech-anism is obviously nonbiological, and hence much more difficult to reconcile with brain dynamics (Lillicrap and Santoro, 2019). The equivalent algorithm for physical, time-continuous systems is the adjoint method (AM) from constrained optimization (Kelley, 1960; Todorov, 2006; Chachuat, 2007). Just like BPTT, the AM requires ei-ther perfectly predicting future states, or running time backwards at certain intervals. The causal equivalent to BPTT is RTRL (Williams and Zipser, 1989). This allows credit assignment to be per-formed online, but only at the cost of a substantial mem-ory overhead, and by sacrificing spatial locality. Many ap-proximations of RTRL have thus been proposed, such as random feedback online learning (RFLO) (Murray, 2019), e-prop (Bellec et al., 2020), and online spatio-temporal learning (OSTL) (Bohnstingl et al., 2023), which radically truncate the gradients to restore locality. GLE takes a fundamentally different approach, directly approximating future errors using the prospective coding mechanism dis-cussed above. In GLE, the stationarity condition on the energy cou-ples representation and error neurons into dynamical mir-rors of each other: by swapping retrospective and prospec-tive time constants, error neurons invert the temporal lag of their associated representation neurons, generating er-rors that are temporally aligned with representations (see Fig. 3a). The resulting microcircuit represents the original instantiation of the ENMC model (Section 3.2). The learning rule in GLE combines this temporally processed error signal with the presynaptic rate, yielding the same delta rule as in Section 3.1: ∆W ∝ e × r↓. For this, representations and (prospective) errors are stored in distinct dendritic compartments, similarly to previously discussed models, and computed in microcircuits as de-picted in Figure 2c. Overall, GLE approximates the AM, making it a bi-ologically plausible implementation of BPTT. Instead of the causality-violating discounted future error required by the AM, GLE error neurons approximate this quantity through prospective coding, which generates the correct temporal shifts for all frequency components of the error signal, at the cost of distorting their amplitude (which is the inevitable price of estimating, rather than knowing, the future). In practice, these approximate errors work well even in deeper architectures, and GLE achieves com-petitive performance on temporal tasks with fully online, local learning. However, this amplitude offset can also be addressed through appropriate learning of the feedback weights. By modulating their weight with the average value of the error amplitude distortion, feedback synapses can correct for this effect and in turn improve the learning of the forward synapses. Such a feedback learning mechanism can be derived within the variational latent equilibrium (VLE) framework (Brandt et al., 2026). Similarly to its predecessors, VLE derives neuro-syn-aptic dynamics from an energy function that subsumes all network errors, but instead of assuming energy conserva-tion, it follows a variational approach that minimizes the network’s integrated energy over time. This approach ul-timately allows the identification of learning rules for the backward weights B that compensate for mismatches be-tween GLE and the AM, aligning the prospective errors ˘e

to their future discounted values ˜e: ∆B ∝ (W e − B˘ˆe)˘ˆe,where ˆ· denotes the inverse of the future discount – a causal operation that can be easily computed. As in pre-vious models, this assumes a form of weight transport, for which biologically plausible plasticity mechanisms exist (see Box 2). The ability of backward synapses to individu-ally adapt to the prospective properties of their presynap-tic error neurons allows VLE to improve both the stability and the convergence speed of temporal learning in ENMC networks. 13 Biology. The microcircuits used in the latent equilibrium models follow the architectures from Section 3.1 and Sec-tion 3.2 and use the same neuron morphologies. Here we focus on the ability of neurons to react prospectively to their inputs. Despite being rarely used in computational models, such prospectivity has been widely observed in bi-ology, from milliseconds (Köndgen et al., 2008) to much longer time scales (Pozzorini et al., 2013; Lundstrom et al., 2008). This phenomenon appears naturally as a con-sequence of negative feedback to the membrane, for exam-ple through spike-frequency adaptation or as a component of the Hodgkin-Huxley spike generation mechanism itself (Fuhrmann et al., 2002; Brandt et al., 2024). Similarly, prospectivity on the scale of the membrane time constant can be observed in populations of noisy spiking neurons without any additional mechanism other than the spike reset itself (Plesser and Gerstner, 2000). 

3.5. Bursting models 

Standard ANN architectures consider point neurons capable of transmitting both representations and errors, as needed by the BP training algorithm. In contrast, when modeling cortical neurons – even compartmentalized ones able to store both errors and representations – it is often assumed that they can only transmit one type of signal via the somatic output. This constraint has created the ne-cessity for the microcircuits described thus far (see section Section 3.2). However, considering a more nuanced view of somatic activity can lift this constraint. By using bursts and spikes as separate aspects of the neural code, neurons can multiplex their outgoing information, allowing for si-multaneous transmission of errors and representations. The Burstprop algorithm (Payeur et al., 2021; Stuck et al., 2025) and its extension towards bursting cortico-cortical networks (BurstCCN, Greedy et al., 2022) uti-lize bursting mechanisms to enable parallel and indepen-dent communication of errors that then drive plasticity. The model considers hierarchically organized and com-partmentalized neurons which can produce two types of “spiking events”, single (sodium) spikes and bursts. While the somatic activity (representation) controls the rate of events the apical activity (errors) controls the probabil-ity that an emitted spike turns into a burst. Intuitively, as these quantities are mixed in the axonal channel, the post-synaptic neurons need to filter out the relevant sig-nal. Whereas higher-level somas need to receive all of these representation-encoding events – i.e., both spikes and bursts – without differentiating between them, lower level apical compartments want to filter out the errors rep-resented by the bursts. As shown by Naud and Sprekeler (2018), such a separation of information can be achieved through short-term synaptic plasticity (Fig. 3b). Soma-targeting synapses with STD suppress the effect on quickly repeated spikes (bursts), causing bursts and single spikes to have similar effects on the postsynaptic neuron. In con-trast, apical-targeting synapses with STF have the oppo-site effect: individual spikes have virtually no effect, but repeated spikes trigger a postsynaptic response, such that effectively only bursts are transmitted. Learning relies on dendritic information segregation similar to the microcir-cuit (MC) models described above: weight changes are proportional to a pre-synaptic eligibility trace modulated by a postsynaptic error; the latter is encoded in apical compartments and transmitted through bursts. These general mechanisms for simultaneous transmis-sion of representations and errors have been cast into a range of computationally performant bursting models. In the original implementation (Payeur et al., 2021), the prob-ability of a burst is computed as a sigmoid function of the apical activity such that in the absence of top-down in-put, i.e., with vanishing potential in the apical dendrite, the neuron produces bursts with some baseline proba-bility PB. Learning occurs when the neuron produces an event in the presence of apical activity, resembling a burst-dependent delta rule reminiscent of previous mod-els: ∆W ∝ (B−PBS)E, where B represents the number of bursts in this context. Here, the error is represented by the number of bursts ˆB that exceeds the baseline PBS present in the neuronal output S, while an eligibility trace E forms a running average over the presynaptic input. If the neu-ron produces a burst, incoming weights are strengthened in proportion to presynaptic activity, while isolated spikes cause synaptic depression. Note that even in the absence of an active teacher, so when all apical dendrites should encode zero error, their baseline burst rates are nonzero. As upstream apical com-partments receive bursts from downstream neurons, they move away from their baseline burst rates, causing the rep-resentation of spurious errors. This makes learning phases necessary to determine the baseline burst ratios for each apical dendrite in order to cancel out these spurious errors. To address this issue, the signed version (Stuck et al., 2025) introduces two types of bursts. Long (positive) bursts are produced for an excited apical dendrite v ≥ 0

and short (negative) bursts are produced if it’s inhibited 

v < 0 (here, the baseline apical potential is assumed to be at 0). Rather than having to compare to an average bursting ratio, synapses now receive signed errors, allow-ing them to directly implement error correction by com-paring the rates of positive B+ and negative B− bursts: 

∆W ∝ (B+ − B−)E. After successfully learning a task or in absence of a teacher, all apical potentials are zero (no errors) so no bursts are produced, and plasticity does not occur. This increases the stability of the model sub-stantially, allowing it to learn more complex classification tasks. In a further extension of burstprop, Greedy et al. (2022) take inspiration from Sacramento et al. (2018) by model-ing another top-down connection: akin to forward connec-tions, these synapses also implement STD, thus reacting identically to bursts and individual spikes. Their weights are set (or learned) to be proportional to the baseline burst probability PB, such that, on average, they transmit the baseline burst rate B = PBS. The difference between the two top-down signals, i.e., between the actual and the baseline burst rates, thus represents an unbiased version 14 aprospective errors (≈ backprop through time) 

# reree

# STF STD b

# spikes + bursts only bursts retrospective representations (memory, time lag) Figure 3: Beyond instantaneous rates: prospective coding and spike/burst multiplexing. (a) Prospective error propagation in GLE. Representation neurons transmit retrospective, lagged information forward through the network (blue), with each layer inducing a lag on the order of τm − τr. Conversely, error neurons propagate prospective, temporally advanced errors backward (red), effectively looking ahead by τr − τm. Together, these opposite temporal shifts realign errors with the pre-synaptic rates that caused them, approximating BPTT without explicitly reversing time. (b) Multiplexing of spikes and bursts in Burstprop. Somatic compartments tracking representations emit two types of events: single spikes and bursts. The probability that an emitted spike turns into a burst is proportional to the apical activity reflecting an error. Forward-propagated activities are filtered post-synaptically via short-term depression (STD) for events, leaving little differentiation between bursts and spikes. Backpropagated activities are filtered via short-term facilitation (STF), leaving only bursts to drive apical activity. To obtain the error that drives learning, the difference between the bursts ( B) and a baseline ( B0) is computed. This scheme captures the core common ideas underlying the different Burstprop algorithms. 

of the error. This difference is computed in the apical dendrite of neurons in lower areas, similarly to how apical errors are computed in Sacramento et al. from the dif-ference between backward-propagated signals from pyra-midal cells and their mirror interneurons. This makes a baseline correction no longer necessary, allowing continu-ous learning without phases. The above studies use different levels of abstraction in their simulations. While the full spiking model is simu-lated as described above, Payeur et al. (2021) and Greedy et al. (2022) also use population-averaged rate approxima-tions that also replace the STD/STF gating mechanism by direct transmission of the required signals. This turns all activities into continuous signals and removes various tem-poral distortions, which greatly stabilizes learning. There-fore, while the spiking models were limited to relatively small tasks such as logical XOR (Payeur et al., 2021) or low-dimensional regression (Greedy et al., 2022), the rate-based models allowed scaling to much more difficult image classification tasks. 

Biology. The neuron model in Burstprop, like the repre-sentation neurons in the models discussed above (see Sec-tion 3.2), can be mapped onto cortical Layer 5 pyramidal neurons. These are well documented to intrinsically pro-duce bursting activity, with coincident apical and somatic activation transforming otherwise single spikes into a burst of activity (Larkum et al., 1999; Milojkovic et al., 2004; Shai et al., 2015). In-vivo results suggest that a multiplex-ing of spikes and burst is used to convey different informa-tion over the same channels (Naud et al., 2024). In par-ticular, the bursting fraction mimicked detection errors, indicating its role as encoding an error. Further, it was shown that dendrite-driven bursting determines synaptic plasticity at the respective dendrites (Kampa et al., 2006; Froemke et al., 2006). On the other hand, as acknowledged by Stuck et al. (2025), the signed bursts are not well cov-ered by experimental evidence, but may be relevant for neuromorphic implementations. On the postsynaptic side, which is responsible for fil-tering the relevant quantities, it has been shown that STD and STF can act as a de-multiplexer of bursts and regu-lar spikes, allowing to distinguish the bottom-up and top-down communication (Naud and Sprekeler, 2018). Addi-tionally, there is recent experimental evidence for connec-tions between suitable neurons with these properties (Lee et al., 2013; Kinnischtzke et al., 2013; Petrof et al., 2015; Zolnik et al., 2020; Naskar et al., 2021; Martinetti et al., 2021). As in other hierarchical models, Burstprop requires symmetry between forward- and backward-projecting syn-apses – see Box 2 for a brief discussion of bio-plausible weight transport. 15 rrr

# high uncertainty low uncertainty Figure 4: Dendritic predictive plasticity for reliability-sensitive target learning. Input from a teacher shifts the somatic distribution away from the one predicted by the dendrite. Learn-ing adjusts dendrite-targeting synapses based on errors eμ and eσ2      

> computed from the predicted distribution and samples u∗drawn from the teacher-nudged somatic distribution. Synapses carrying low-uncertainty inputs are strengthened over ones carrying more uncertain information. The plot (bottom) indicates an example of the probability q(u)of observing a given membrane potential under the teacher (orange), teacher-nudged (blue dashed) and predicted (green) distributions.

4. Uncertainty representation 

The environments to which organisms have to adapt are inherently highly variable. Taking into account and internally modeling this variability is a necessary compo-nent of adaptability. The brain must hence take uncer-tainty into account when updating its internal models of the world. This implies that it is not sufficient for cortical microcircuits to correct for prediction errors and account for unexpected sensorial experiences, but these errors must be modulated in some way by the uncertainty of the pre-diction. This adds a toll to the amount of information that neu-rons need to process, and such modulation would not be realizable in a biologically plausible way without the aid of dendritic compartments to collect and help to locally pro-cess all these different pieces of information (predictions, errors, and uncertainties) during learning. 

4.1. Dendritic predictive plasticity performs error correc-tion and reliability matching 

A recent Bayesian view on the dynamics of conduc-tance-based neurons and synapses suggests that they are naturally equipped to perform optimal uncertainty-weight-ed information integration (Jordan et al., 2024). This framework can be seen as an extension of US learning whereby the dendrite tries to match a full distribution rep-resented in the soma rather than only an instantaneous value of the somatic potential. Synapses thus not only learn to reproduce a somatic target activity as in the mod-els presented above, but they also adjust synaptic weights to achieve some target variance in the somatic potential (Fig. 4). Afferent inputs from different sources and associated with different amounts of uncertainty are coupled conduc-tively to the dendrite. This conductive coupling naturally performs a weighted averaging of inputs, reminiscent of Bayesian opinion pooling. In this view, the dendritic dy-namics can be interpreted as predicting a posterior distri-bution over the somatic potential given pre-synaptic in-puts. In the absence of a teaching signal, the somatic mem-brane potential u will sample from this distribution. Given teaching input, this (implicit) distribution will be nudged towards the distribution of the teacher. Accordingly, these nudged-activity samples u∗ can be interpreted as somatic targets and can be used to compute the implicit error signal both for the mean ( eμ) and the variance ( eσ2 ) of the predicted distribution. Dendrite-targeting weights are adjusted to decrease this implicit error, thereby moving the predicted distribution towards the target distribution. Furthermore, as afferents with high uncertainty contribute less to producing a correct prediction, they are weakened, thus allowing other projections with higher reliability to gain more influence. Formally, learning in this model corresponds to re-ducing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between a target distribution and the currently predicted somatic distribu-tion. More specifically, plasticity implements gradient as-cent on the log posterior somatic probability of samples 

u∗ from the target probability distribution q(u∗): ∆W ∝ 

> ∂∂W

log q(u∗) ∝ (eμ + eσ2 )rpre , which gradually reduces the error in both sample mean μ and variance σ2. Note that the model described in Jordan et al. (2024) considers the case where the soma is clamped to the teaching input, thus yielding a direct comparison between a sample from the target and the predicted distribution. A relaxation of this assumption, whereby the prediction is compared to a sample from the target-nudged distribution (in keeping with learning in the US model), seems feasible, while also increasing biological plausibility. 

Biology. The model makes the prediction that, after learn-ing, the soma will respond to reliable information with a decrease in membrane potential variability. One circum-stantial piece of evidence is the well-documented wide-spread quenching of the trial-to-trial variability to a re-peatedly presented stimulus (Churchland et al., 2010). This reduction in variability can be interpreted as sen-sory input constraining the set of possible neuronal states, with a more consistent neuronal response reflecting greater certainty about the sensory input. More recently it was found that stimulus onset in the within-trial setting was associated with a decrease in membrane potential vari-ability proportional to the perceptual reliability in cortical neurons (von Hünerbein et al., 2025). Here neuronal spik-ing responses were recorded in posterior parietal cortex in mice performing an audio-visual change detection task. The inferred membrane potential variability was found to be lower in trials containing more perceptually reliable multi-modal cues, thereby lending the model direct ex-perimental support. 16 sensory input 

# context Figure 5: Uncertainty weighting in multi-compartment neurons. (a) Negative (left) and positive (right) prediction error circuit consisting of three cell types: layer 2/3 pyramidal cells, SST interneurons and PV interneurons. SST cells represent the prediction of the stimulus mean in the positive circuit and the stimulus itself in the negative circuit, whereas PV cells learn to represent its variance from context. Error neurons first form error estimates (s − ˆμ)± in their dendrites, which are then modulated by divisive inhibition from PV cells to form the uncertainty-modulated prediction errors (UPEs) e± = ( s − ˆμ)±/σ 2. These modulated errors then innervate the apical dendrite of representation neurons and drive learning at its basal synapses. (b) A circuit for dynamic uncertainty estimation. Following the same principle as in (a) (but with a different assignment of interneuron identities) error neuron circuits produce UPEs e. In parallel, second-order errors δ = 1         

> σ2−e2are computed by dedicated second-order error neurons. Both eand δare integrated into the apical tree of representation neurons. Finally, the higher-level (prior) variance σpmultiplicatively controls the gain of apical-to-soma integration.

4.2. Uncertainty-modulated Prediction Errors 

While Jordan et al. (2024) describe reliability-weight-ed integration of multiple dendritic input pathways within individual neurons, Wilmes et al. (2025) addresses a com-plementary problem: how can uncertainty associated with a prediction modulate the error signals that drive infer-ence and learning in a cortical hierarchy? Starting from maximum-likelihood estimation, Wilmes et al. (2025) de-rive that the relevant error signal is not simply the differ-ence between a sensory stimulus s and its predicted mean 

μ, but this difference weighted by the precision, i.e., the in-verse variance, of the prediction. Consequently, the same physical mismatch produces a smaller error signal when observations in the current context are expected to be highly variable, and a larger error signal when the vari-ability is expected to be low. The proposed cortical implementation combines sub-tractive and divisive inhibition (Fig. 5a). Because neu-ronal firing rates are non-negative and layer 2/3 pyrami-dal cells generally have low baseline firing rates (Niell and Stryker, 2008), positive and negative prediction errors are represented by separate populations of error neurons, fol-lowing earlier predictive-coding proposals (Rao and Bal-lard, 1999; Keller and Mrsic-Flogel, 2018). Each representation neuron is coupled to a pair of such circuits. Each circuit contains two inhibitory populations of SST and PV interneurons, which, over time, learn to encode the first two moments of the stimulus from the current (sensory) context. SST cells replicate either the input s or the prediction of its mean r = ˆ μ, while the PV cells learn to predict the variance σ2 of the stimulus from the context using the difference s − ˆμ as a teacher. The pyramidal error neurons then compare the stimu-lus and its predicted mean through subtractive inhibition within a dedicated dendritic compartment (see also At-tinger et al., 2017). The resulting dendritic mismatch sig-nal is then divisively modulated by PV inhibition close to the soma, thereby scaling the dendritic error by the expected variance of the prediction: e+ = 1 

> σ2

(s − ˆμ)+

and e− = 1 

> σ2

(s − ˆμ)−, for positive and negative errors re-spectively. This UPE can now be used by basal synapses of the representation neuron to learn stimulus represen-tations from contextual predictions, similarly to how pre-dictions are learned in the models from Section 3. Over time, its prediction converges to the true mean r → μ,but with a context-dependent learning rate; thus, it has the ability to only update its predictions when it receives high-certainty sensory information. To this end, dendritic and somatic compartments contribute distinct operations: dendrites support the comparison between predicted and observed input, whereas perisomatic gain control imple-ments uncertainty weighting. As an alternative to the microcircuit model proposed in Wilmes et al. (2025), Hertäg et al. (2025) show how the variance of sensory inputs can be estimated directly from the activity of the error neurons. These estimates are not learned, but rather updated directly through neuronal dy-namics, allowing hierarchical circuits to dynamically track both sensory and prediction uncertainty. 

Biology. The model proposes that SST interneurons pro-vide the subtractive component, whereas PV interneurons provide the divisive component (Fig. 5a). In the posi-tive prediction-error circuit, SST activity represents the predicted mean and is subtracted from the sensory in-put. In the negative prediction-error circuit, SST activ-ity instead represents the current stimulus, which is sub-17 tracted from an excitatory representation of the predic-tion. PV activity, on the other hand, represents the ex-pected variance in both circuits and divisively suppresses error-neuron responses. Importantly, the mean and vari-ance need not be supplied externally to the circuit. Local activity-dependent plasticity allows inputs conveying the current context to train SST and PV responses to reflect the mean and variance of the associated stimulus distri-bution, respectively. Because these statistics are stored in context-specific synaptic weights, the same inhibitory neu-rons can express different mean and variance estimates in different contexts. Under the assumptions of the model, PV firing rates become proportional to the expected vari-ance, providing the divisive signal required to generate UPEs. When positive and negative UPEs drive the activity of representation neurons, uncertainty automatically con-trols the effective rate of learning. In a low-uncertainty context, prediction errors are amplified and the internal representation adapts rapidly. In a high-uncertainty con-text, the same deviations produce smaller updates, pre-venting the representation from tracking expected fluctu-ations in the sensory input. Extending the mechanism across cortical levels further allows sensory evidence and prior predictions to be combined according to their respec-tive uncertainties. The model therefore links compartment-specific neuronal computations to context-dependent learn-ing and Bayes-optimal inference, and predicts that iden-tical sensory mismatches should evoke smaller layer 2/3 error responses in high-variance contexts, accompanied by cell-type-specific representations of the expected mean and variance. 

4.3. Dynamic uncertainty estimation 

Uncertainty varies dynamically with context, and good internal models of the world must account for this. Nor-matively, this entails writing uncertainty not as a param-eter but as a parameterized function of current neuronal activity. Moreover, it has been argued in the predictive coding literature that uncertainty weighting of prediction errors is the backbone of attention (Feldman and Friston, 2010). To be a satisfactory model of attention, this weight-ing must again vary dynamically with context on the time scale of neuronal dynamics, not synaptic learning. When modeling uncertainty as selective modulation of dendritic compartments, the multiplicative gain associ-ated to each dendritic compartment must thus be adjusted rapidly upon context switches. Compartmentalization is essential here because the different inputs integrated into the soma need to be weighted independently (so-called seg-regation of inputs) and dynamically, at much faster time scales than typically affordable for synaptic learning. As a possible mechanism for implementing such real-time uncertainty modulation, Granier et al. (2024) con-sider dendritic inhibition and disinhibition by interneuron circuits. These circuit motifs are ubiquitous in the cere-bral cortex, the most widely known involving vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and SST interneurons (Pi et al., 2013). In the typical case of a two-point neuron represent-ing the apical and somatic compartments of a deep corti-cal pyramidal cell, such a circuit notably controls the gain of apical-to-soma integration, as a function of top-down (contextual) inputs (Fig. 5b). Its dynamics can be derived from a normative model for predicting both the mean and the confidence (inverse variance) of sensory data. A normative approach to learning synaptic weights in such networks now yields a twin set of error-correcting rules (Granier et al., 2024). Reminiscent of previous mod-els, plasticity in weights W between pyramidal represen-tation neurons minimizes the confidence-weighted predic-tion error: ∆W ∝ e r , with e = ( s − ˆμ)/σ 2. On the other hand, inhibitory plasticity in weights A between interneu-rons and pyramidal neurons minimizes second-order errors 

δ: ∆A ∝ δ r . These second-order errors are computed as a difference between confidence and performance, i.e., be-tween the inverse uncertainty 1 

> σ2

and the prediction error 

e2: δ = 1 

> σ2

− e2. This illuminates the diversity of potential error-correcting plasticity rules operating on dendritic in-formation, and their capacity to learn not only first- but also higher-order moments of the input distribution. Finally, and similarly to the UPEs discussed above, the effective learning rate of weights conveying classical (first-order) predictions again depends on the expected uncer-tainty. Under low expected uncertainty (high confidence), prediction errors entail large changes, while under high ex-pected uncertainty (low confidence), the same errors could be attributed to variability and entail smaller changes. 

Biology. Dynamic uncertainty estimation predicts that the signatures of uncertainty in neural circuits should change dynamically with higher-order representations. If these models are correct, cortico-cortical projections would com-pute either classical predictions or expected uncertainty, depending on the postsynaptic cell type. Locally, signatures of expected uncertainty should be sought in inhibitory/disinhibitory interneuron circuits, ul-timately leading to fast modulation. For the computation of second-order errors in neuronal circuits, expected un-certainty signals must be compared to (subtracted from) actual error magnitudes, computed for example through the sum of positive and negative error signals onto basket cells as in Hertäg et al. (2025). One hypothesis is that the somatic activity of a specific type of superficial pyramidal cells represents these second-order error signals, but VIP interneurons are also potential candidates (Najafi et al., 2025). Finally, the normative framework derived in Granier et al. (2024) suggests that errors afferent to a specific neuron should undergo two types of weighting. If the neuron is not confident of its own prediction, i.e., if the expected vari-ance of its prediction σ2 is high, then its prediction error is not important, so it should be weighted divisively by σ2.At the same time, if afferent neurons from other areas are not confident about their own predictions of this neuron’s activity, i.e., if their expected variances σ2 

> p

are high, then the neuron should trust the received errors more than the 18 received predictions, so it should weight the errors mul-tiplicatively by σ2 

> p

. In terms of circuits (and experimen-tal predictions), this entails that the activity of neurons encoding errors and the apical dendrites of neurons en-coding representations should be inversely modulated by top-down expected uncertainty. This can also form a nor-mative framework for explaining the gain of apical-to-soma integration in deep pyramidal cells, central to some mod-ern theories of conscious processing (Aru et al., 2020). For a specific implementation, the laminar specificity of SST activity (Muñoz et al., 2017) and targets (Naka et al., 2019) offers a good candidate. 

5. Discussion 

Taking stock, we have presented a selection of biolog-ically inspired models of neuronal computation that use the flexibility offered by dendritic compartments to en-able powerful and local plasticity rules. The key pieces of information that are required by all of these rules are pre-and post- synaptic activities, as well as target or error in-formation. Synaptic weights are adjusted proportionally to their contribution to the misalignment between activi-ties and targets, approximating gradient descent as a core underlying motif, and thereby inevitably yielding variants of the delta rule. Using dendritic compartments, all of the factors in these learning rules find expression at the local level of each neuron. From this taxonomy of models we can observe a rela-tively simple principle at play, as manifested by the large overlap between models in terms of neuron morphology. To wit, representation dendrites always learn to follow the activity at the soma, which is pulled away by some teacher – either as a direct target or in the form of an error sig-nal. What individuates each model is mainly the network structure, which defines how representations and error (or teacher) signals are encoded and where they are transmit-ted. In many cases this allows for specific experimental predictions, some of which have already been borne out by recent studies. 

Plasticity and the real-world complexity of dendritic trees. 

Our perspective only requires the existence of few func-tionally distinct compartments. The complexity of den-dritic trees might suggest that this does exhaust their functional value. While, as we argued early on, we should not fall victim to the naturalistic fallacy, it might well be that there is a good functional reason for this complex-ity. Based on what these models tell us, we may specu-late that an even more federated dendritic structure could serve the separate representation (and weighting) of the same principle of error correction, but with respect to dif-ferent sensory modalities, context information, or, more generally, a useful separation in some abstract space that is not built-in by evolution, but that neurons can learn through experience and plasticity. The well-documented mobility of synapses along the dendritic tree (Bonhoeffer and Yuste, 2002; Bhatt et al., 2009) certainly points in this direction. Moreover, plasticity mechanisms often rely on coinci-dence signals involving backpropagating action potentials or dendritic calcium spikes, which benefit from a degree of independence from somatic dynamics. Consistent with this view, dendritic inhibition can locally gate these coin-cidence signals, effectively switching plasticity on or off in a pathway-specific manner (Wilmes et al., 2016). Because the spatial location of inhibition determines which den-dritic branches exhibit plasticity, different input streams can be learned independently without disrupting previ-ously stored associations. 

Spiking models. Most models presented in this perspec-tive are rate-based, whereas actual biological neurons com-municate using discrete spikes (or bursts). Indeed, even when the models are ostensibly spike-based, such as US or Burstprop, they are usually implemented in terms of rates as tasks grow in complexity. By their discrete nature, spiking models introduce additional difficulties regarding the encoding of error or target information. Notably, sev-eral of the models subtract activities to determine errors, something that is trivial to implement when using a con-tinuous encoding in terms of rates. However, these sub-tractions become dangerous when dealing with spike sig-nals, as small timing differences can turn an error signal from zero to having a large value, with potentially highly disruptive effects effects on learning. This kind of issue is made worse in noisy systems such as biological networks or neuromorphic hardware – the natural technological target of bio-inspired spiking models. 

Modulatory mechanisms. Neurons have many ways to modulate their interactions beyond just spikes or firing rates, which in turn may strongly influence what informa-tion synapses can have local access to. Such modulation can happen both pre-synaptically and post-synaptically. Pre-synaptic modulation would include the already dis-cussed spikes and bursts, but could potentially also in-volve spike shape effects (Hoppa et al., 2014; Ramezani and Akan, 2018). It would also include prospectivity with variable temporal horizons, which can also adapt dynam-ically for more powerful temporal processing capabilities. In parallel, temporal delays can hugely influence encoded information and these can be both pre- and post- synaptic: pre-synaptic delays due to axonal length and thickness, and post-synaptic delays because of synapse position on the (receiving) dendritic tree. Finally, post-synaptic mod-ulations also include all kinds of synaptic transfer func-tions, from short-term plasticity to stochastic transmis-sion, plus further gating mechanisms mediated by neuro-transmitters and neuromodulators. These can all influence what information is available in which place of a com-partmentalized neuron, and therefore can inform synaptic plasticity. This zoo of multiplexing mechanisms is also rel-evant for information separation beyond compartments, as discussed further below. 

Consequences for neuromorphic silicon. In the vast ma-jority of cases, neuromorphic networks capable of complex 19 computation are not trained in situ, with local synaptic plasticity, but rather in a hardware-in-the-loop approach, with a separate computer carrying out the synaptic weight updates. This holds for digital (Esser et al., 2015) and analog (Schmitt et al., 2017; Billaudelle et al., 2020; Göltz et al., 2021; Cramer et al., 2022) electronics, but also for other kinds of neuromorphic substrates (de Lima et al., 2019), with only rare exceptions (Renner et al., 2024) that are limited in scale. Much of the advantage offered by physical implementations of neuronal networks is thus lost in the use of less efficient computing substrates and in the transport of information towards them. We therefore argue in favor of a full physical instantiation of inference 

and learning in neuromorphic silicon, and suggest that the neuron and synapse models discussed above can serve as blueprints towards achieving this goal. While the specific argument for dendritic learning par-adigms is indeed made possible by these recent advances, the idea of increasing efficiency by localizing information is not without precedent, and modern machine learning serves as a prime example. Since the advent of deep learn-ing, the increasing demand for compute has led to the de-velopment of tailored silicon (e.g., Jouppi et al., 2023). Early on, it was recognized that in particular for data in-tensive applications such as the linear algebra involved in machine learning, increased locality of information can sig-nificantly increase efficiency (Kung and Leiserson, 1978). Locality has since become a guiding principle in the struc-tural design of efficient computing systems (Leiserson et al., 2020). Spatial and temporal locality becomes especially rele-vant for the real-time learning of patterns with temporal structure. This is because any additional element of com-munication and storage induces a separation between the internal state of the system and its external stimuli, which cannot simply be frozen between consecutive computing steps in real-time settings. At the algorithmic level, the dominant backpropagation-based paradigms for training neural networks are non-local in time, requiring the stor-age of trajectories during the forward pass for later use in gradient calculations in the backward pass. Neuromorphic implementations of real-time error transport and learning in networks of structured neurons, which leverage spatial locality to achieve temporal locality of learning, are there-fore particularly interesting candidates for instantiating online learning in silico. The resulting locality obviates the need for an external training algorithm, while at the same time saving memory and transport costs in the process. Thus, as with other locality-preserving techniques, such models also hold substantial promise in curbing the exor-bitant energy costs (International Energy Agency, 2025) of modern machine learning systems. It should also be noted that while the models presented here are designed to explain credit assignment in biological neuronal networks, engineered silicon does not come with the same constraints. As has become apparent, implicitly or explicitly, in some of our above discussions, function-ally useful features exist that biology cannot or at least does not realize; these include the likes of negative firing rates, multiple neuronal outputs, and the communication of multi-bit values, all of which are cheap and straight-forward to implement in silico. The well-known adage about airplanes not having to flap their wings should also hold for neuromorphic architectures: given the flexibility to move beyond beyond biological constraints, such ideas should definitely be taken into consideration when they can clearly offer tangible benefits. The neuromorphic community has certainly already taken note of the increased interest in neuronal compart-mentalization and its functional consequences. Examples of hardware platforms implementing multi-compartment circuits include not only simulated circuitry (Cartiglia et al., 2020; Cartiglia et al., 2022; Maryada et al., 2025), but also fully developed systems (Wang and Liu, 2011; Davies et al., 2018; Billaudelle et al., 2020; Pehle et al., 2022; Richter et al., 2024). However, current implementa-tions are mostly limited to small scales, and demonstra-tions of true advantages of compartmentalized (as opposed to point) neurons remain scarce and specifically do not in-clude on-chip training of elaborate tasks (Yang et al., 2020; Polykretis et al., 2020; Kaiser et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023; Uludağ et al., 2024; Dietrich et al., 2025; Göltz et al., 2025). This mismatch highlights that challenges such as noisy substrates (Semenova et al., 2019; Billaudelle et al., 2022) and spiking communication (see above) still need to be overcome, but is also a testament to the difficulty of embedding complex local plasticity into neuromorphic silicon in the first place. 

Information separation: beyond compartments. So far, we have argued for dendritic compartments as providing the physical substrate for storing separate pieces of informa-tion. We conclude our discussion with a more critical per-spective of this fundamental premise and discuss potential alternatives. Instead of encoding different quantities in different physical locations, they could be encoded by means of different physical carriers, such as ion concentrations. In-deed, intracellular calcium concentration is a key factor driving synaptic plasticity (Malenka et al., 1988; Graup-ner and Brunel, 2005; Graupner and Brunel, 2012), where long-term potentiation is induced when the intracellular calcium concentration is above a given threshold, while long-term depression is induced below this threshold. It would therefore not be unrealistic to see this difference be-tween the calcium concentration and the threshold calcium concentration as an error signal. Yet another option would be to separate the informa-tion in different times or phases such as the wake and sleep phases in Boltzmann machines (Ackley et al., 1985). During the wake phase, the output neurons are driven by sensory stimuli, while during the sleep phase, those neurons are only driven by internal representations. The synaptic learning rule then simply computes the difference of pre-post correlations between those two phases, which represents the error between the sampled and the target distribution. If the learning rate α is small enough, the 20 weights can simply integrate those correlations in the dif-ferent phases without the need to store them explicitly. Finally, the separation of information could take place in the frequency domain. Fast information carriers such as spikes, which can encode temporal information at the mil-lisecond resolution, could be separated from slower infor-mation carriers such as membrane potentials, which fluctu-ate on time scales of tens of milliseconds and more. From this perspective, a synapse could differentiate the (fast) back-propagating action potential from a slower postsy-naptic potential (PSP). As an example, both the voltage triplet rule (Clopath et al., 2010) and the original triplet rule (Pfister and Gerstner, 2006) explicitly build on this in-gredient. In both models, long-term potentiation depends on the product of a fast and a slow postsynaptic variable. Later studies further take into account the propagation of the membrane potential along the dendritic tree (Letzkus et al., 2006; Graupner and Brunel, 2012). While it remains to be shown how any of these mech-anisms can allow the kind of deep credit assignment and complex real-time modulation that the dendritic models are capable of, their presence in biology and their impor-tance for plasticity is uncontroversial. Whether as an al-ternative to the dendritic segregation of information, or as complementary, facilitating factors, a complete picture of deep credit assignment in the brain will need to take them into account. 

Acknowledgements 

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the European Union under grant agreement #101147319 (EBRAINS 2.0; BvH, FB, JG, TG, PH, JJ, MAP). KM thanks the Volk-swagen Foundation for funding under the call “NEXT– Neuromorphic Computing”, and the Swiss National Sci-ence Foundation (grant number 225643). AG is supported by the Agence National de la Recherche (ANR-23-IACL-0008) and INSERM. KW is funded by the Swiss Na-tional Science Foundation Starting Grant (TMSGI3_225-811). JG and MAP also thank the German Research Foundation for support through the Heidelberg STRUC-TURES Excellence Cluster (Germany’s Excellence Strat-egy EXC 2181/1-390900948). JPP is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation Grant “Why spikes?” (310030_212247). BvH, PH, SB and AG acknowledge the support of the Graduate School for Cellular and Biomed-ical Sciences (GCB) of the University of Bern. JG and TG acknowledge the support of the Heidelberg Graduate School For Physics (HGSFP). Last but not least, we owe a particular debt of gratitude for the ongoing support from the Manfred Stärk Foundation. 

Acronyms                                       

> AM adjoint method
> ANN artificial neural network
> BP error backpropagation
> BPTT backpropagation through time
> CA3 cornu ammonis area 3
> CNN convolutional neural network
> dendritic BP dendritic backpropagation
> dendritic CMC dendritic cortical microcircuit
> dendritic hPC dendritic hierarchical predictive coding
> dendritic TP dendritic target propagation
> DFC deep feedback control
> DG dentate gyrus
> ELiSE efficient learning of sequences (model)
> ENMC error neuron microcircuit
> FA feedback alignment
> GLE generalized latent equilibrium
> LE latent equilibrium
> LMAN lateral magnocellular nucleus of the ant. nidopallium
> LTD long-term depression
> LTP long-term potentiation
> MC microcircuit
> ML machine learning
> OSTL online spatio-temporal learning
> PC predictive coding
> PID proportional-integral-derivative (controller)
> PV parvalbumin-positive (interneuron)
> RA robust nucleus of the arcopallium
> RFLO random feedback online learning
> RNN recurrent neural network
> RTRL real-time recurrent learning
> SST somatostatin-positive (interneuron)
> STD short-term depression
> STF short-term facilitation
> TP target propagation
> UPE uncertainty-modulated prediction error
> US Urbanczik & Senn (learning rule)
> VIP vasoactive intestinal peptide (interneuron)
> VLE variational latent equilibrium

References 

Aceituno, P. V., de Haan, S., Loidl, R., Beumer, L., and Grewe, B. F. (Apr. 2024). Challenging Backpropaga-tion: Evidence for Target Learning in the Neocortex .

doi : 10.1101/2024.04.10.588837 .Aceituno, P. V., Farinha, M. T., Loidl, R., and Grewe, B. F. (May 2023). “Learning cortical hierarchies with temporal Hebbian updates”. In: Frontiers in Compu-tational Neuroscience 17. doi : 10.3389/fncom.2023. 1136010 .Ackley, D. H., Hinton, G. E., and Sejnowski, T. J. (Jan. 1985). “A Learning Algorithm for Boltzmann Ma-chines*”. In: Cognitive Science 9.1, pp. 147–169. doi :

10.1207/s15516709cog0901_7 .21 Ahmad, N., Ambrogioni, L., and van Gerven, M. A. J. (2020). Overcoming the Weight Transport Problem via Spike-Timing-Dependent Weight Inference . url : http s://arxiv.org/abs/2003.03988 . arXiv: 2003.03988 [q-bio.NC] .Akrout, M., Wilson, C., Humphreys, P., Lillicrap, T., and Tweed, D. B. (2019). “Deep Learning without Weight Transport”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems . Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc. url :

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/ paper/2019/file/f387624df552cea2f369918c5e1e 12bc-Paper.pdf .Aronov, D., Andalman, A. S., and Fee, M. S. (May 2008). “A Specialized Forebrain Circuit for Vocal Babbling in the Juvenile Songbird”. In: Science 320.5876, pp. 630– 634. doi : 10.1126/science.1155140 .Artola, A., Bröcher, S., and Singer, W. (Sept. 1990). “Dif-ferent voltage-dependent thresholds for inducing long-term depression and long-term potentiation in slices of rat visual cortex”. In: Nature 347.6288, pp. 69–72. doi :

10.1038/347069a0 .Aru, J., Suzuki, M., and Larkum, M. E. (Oct. 2020). “Cel-lular Mechanisms of Conscious Processing”. In: Trends in Cognitive Sciences 24.10, pp. 814–825. doi : 10 . 1016/j.tics.2020.07.006 .Asabuki, T. and Fukai, T. (Mar. 2020). “Somatodendritic consistency check for temporal feature segmentation”. In: Nature Communications 11.1. doi : 10.1038/s414 67-020-15367-w .Attinger, A., Wang, B., and Keller, G. B. (June 2017). “Visuomotor Coupling Shapes the Functional Devel-opment of Mouse Visual Cortex”. In: Cell 169.7, 1291– 1302.e14. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.023 .Bartunov, S., Santoro, A., Richards, B., Marris, L., Hin-ton, G. E., and Lillicrap, T. (2018). “Assessing the Scal-ability of Biologically-Motivated Deep Learning Algo-rithms and Architectures”. In: Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems . Vol. 31. Curran Asso-ciates, Inc. url : https://proceedings.neurips.cc/ paper/2018/hash/63c3ddcc7b23daa1e42dc41f9a44a 873-Abstract.html .Bellec, G., Scherr, F., Subramoney, A., Hajek, E., Salaj, D., Legenstein, R., and Maass, W. (July 2020). “A Solution to the Learning Dilemma for Recurrent Net-works of Spiking Neurons”. In: Nature Communications 

11.1, p. 3625. doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-17236-y .Beniaguev, D., Segev, I., and London, M. (Sept. 2021). “Single cortical neurons as deep artificial neural net-works”. In: Neuron 109.17, 2727–2739.e3. doi : 10.101 6/j.neuron.2021.07.002 .Bhatt, D. H., Zhang, S., and Gan, W.-B. (Mar. 2009). “Dendritic Spine Dynamics”. In: Annual Review of Physiology 71.1, pp. 261–282. doi : 10.1146/annurev. physiol.010908.163140 .Billaudelle, S., Stradmann, Y., Schreiber, K., Cramer, B., Baumbach, A., Dold, D., Göltz, J., Kungl, Á. F., Wun-derlich, T. C., Hartel, A., et al. (Oct. 2020). “Versatile Emulation of Spiking Neural Networks on an Accel-erated Neuromorphic Substrate”. In: 2020 IEEE Inter-national Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) ,pp. 1–5. doi : 10.1109/ISCAS45731.2020.9180741 .Billaudelle, S., Weis, J., Dauer, P., and Schemmel, J. (Oct. 2022). “An Accurate and Flexible Analog Emulation of AdEx Neuron Dynamics in Silicon”. In: pp. 1–4. doi :

10.1109/icecs202256217.2022.9971058 .Bohnstingl, T., Woźniak, S., Pantazi, A., and Eleftheriou, E. (Nov. 2023). “Online Spatio-Temporal Learning in Deep Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 34.11, pp. 8894–8908. doi : 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3153985 .Bolhuis, J. J. and Gahr, M. (May 2006). “Neural mecha-nisms of birdsong memory”. In: Nature Reviews Neu-roscience 7.5, pp. 347–357. doi : 10.1038/nrn1904 .Bolhuis, J. J. and Moorman, S. (Mar. 2015). “Birdsong memory and the brain: In search of the template”. In: 

Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews 50, pp. 41– 55. doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.11.019 .Bonhoeffer, T. and Yuste, R. (Sept. 2002). “Spine Motil-ity”. In: Neuron 35.6, pp. 1019–1027. doi : 10.1016/ s0896-6273(02)00906-6 .Brandalise, F., Carta, S., Helmchen, F., Lisman, J., and Gerber, U. (Nov. 2016). “Dendritic NMDA spikes are necessary for timing-dependent associative LTP in CA3 pyramidal cells”. In: Nature Communications 7.1. 

doi : 10.1038/ncomms13480 .Brandalise, F. and Gerber, U. (Feb. 2014). “Mossy fiber-evoked subthreshold responses induce timing-dependent plasticity at hippocampal CA3 recurrent synapses”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111.11, pp. 4303–4308. doi : 10.1073/pnas. 1317667111 .Brandt, S., Haider, P., Senn, W., Benitez, F., and Petro-vici, M. A. (2026). A Variational Latent Equilibrium for Learning in Neuronal Circuits . url : https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2603 . 09600 . arXiv: 2603 . 09600 [q-bio.NC] .Brandt, S., Petrovici, M. A., Senn, W., Wilmes, K. A., and Benitez, F. (May 2024). Prospective and Retrospective Coding in Cortical Neurons . url : https://arxiv.or g/abs/2405.14810 . arXiv: 2405.14810 [q-bio.NC] .Brea, J., Gaál, A. T., Urbanczik, R., and Senn, W. (June 2016). “Prospective Coding by Spiking Neurons”. In: 

PLOS Computational Biology 12.6, pp. 1–25. doi : 10. 1371/journal.pcbi.1005003 .Brea, J., Senn, W., and Pfister, J.-P. (June 2013). “Match-ing Recall and Storage in Sequence Learning with Spiking Neural Networks”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 

33.23, pp. 9565–9575. doi : 10.1523/jneurosci.4098-12.2013 .Cartiglia, M., Haessig, G., and Indiveri, G. (Aug. 2020). “An error-propagation spiking neural network compat-ible with neuromorphic processors”. In: 2020 2nd IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Cir-cuits and Systems (AICAS) . IEEE, pp. 84–88. doi :

10.1109/aicas48895.2020.9073856 .22 Cartiglia, M., Rubino, A., Narayanan, S., Frenkel, C., Haessig, G., Indiveri, G., and Payvand, M. (May 2022). “Stochastic Dendrites Enable Online Learn-ing in Mixed-Signal Neuromorphic Processing Sys-tems”. In: 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , pp. 476–480. doi :

10.1109/ISCAS48785.2022.9937833 .Chachuat, B. (2007). “Nonlinear and Dynamic Optimiza-tion: From Theory to Practice”. In: Lecture notes, EPFL , pp. 1–187. url : https://infoscience.epfl. ch/handle/20.500.14299/12332 .Churchland, M. M., Yu, B. M., Cunningham, J. P., Sugrue, L. P., Cohen, M. R., Corrado, G. S., Newsome, W. T., Clark, A. M., Hosseini, P., Scott, B. B., et al. (Feb. 2010). “Stimulus onset quenches neural variability: a widespread cortical phenomenon”. In: Nature Neuro-science 13.3, pp. 369–378. doi : 10.1038/nn.2501 .Clopath, C., Büsing, L., Vasilaki, E., and Gerstner, W. (Jan. 2010). “Connectivity Reflects Coding: A Model of Voltage-Based STDP with Homeostasis”. In: Nature Neuroscience 13.3, pp. 344–352. doi : 10 . 1038 / nn . 2479 .Cornford, J. H., Mercier, M. S., Leite, M., Magloire, V., Häusser, M., and Kullmann, D. M. (Oct. 2019). “Den-dritic NMDA receptors in parvalbumin neurons enable strong and stable neuronal assemblies”. In: eLife 8. doi :

10.7554/elife.49872 .Cramer, B., Billaudelle, S., Kanya, S., Leibfried, A., Grübl, A., Karasenko, V., Pehle, C., Schreiber, K., Stradmann, Y., Weis, J., et al. (Jan. 2022). “Surro-gate Gradients for Analog Neuromorphic Computing”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

119.4. doi : 10.1073/pnas.2109194119 .Crick, F. (Jan. 1989). “The Recent Excitement about Neu-ral Networks”. In: Nature 337.6203, pp. 129–132. doi :

10.1038/337129a0 .Davies, M., Srinivasa, N., Lin, T.-H., Chinya, G., Cao, Y., Choday, S. H., Dimou, G., Joshi, P., Imam, N., Jain, S., et al. (Jan. 2018). “Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore processor with on-chip learning”. In: IEEE Micro 38.1, pp. 82–99. doi : 10.1109/mm.2018.112130359 .De Lima, T. F., Peng, H.-T., Tait, A. N., Nahmias, M. A., Miller, H. B., Shastri, B. J., and Prucnal, P. R. (Mar. 2019). “Machine Learning With Neuromorphic Photonics”. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology 37.5, pp. 1515–1534. doi : 10.1109/jlt.2019.2903474 .Denève, S. and Machens, C. K. (Mar. 2016). “Efficient Codes and Balanced Networks”. In: Nature Neuro-science 19.3, pp. 375–382. doi : 10.1038/nn.4243 .Deperrois, N., Petrovici, M. A., Senn, W., and Jordan, J. (Apr. 2022). “Learning Cortical Representations through Perturbed and Adversarial Dreaming”. In: 

eLife 11, e76384. doi : 10.7554/eLife.76384 .Dietrich, R., Spilger, P., Müller, E., Schemmel, J., and Knoll, A. C. (2025). “Sequence Learning with Analog Neuromorphic Multi-Compartment Neurons and On-Chip Structural STDP”. In: Machine Learning, Opti-mization, and Data Science . Springer Nature Switzer-land, pp. 207–230. doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-82487-6_15 .Ebina, T., Masamizu, Y., Tanaka, Y. R., Watakabe, A., Hirakawa, R., Hirayama, Y., Hira, R., Terada, S.-I., Koketsu, D., Hikosaka, K., et al. (May 2018). “Two-photon imaging of neuronal activity in motor cortex of marmosets during upper-limb movement tasks”. In: 

Nature Communications 9.1. doi : 10.1038/s41467-018-04286-6 .Ellenberger, B., Haider, P., Benitez, F., Jordan, J., Max, K., Jaras, I., Kriener, L., and Petrovici, M. A. (Dec. 2025). “Backpropagation through space, time and the brain”. In: Nature Communications 17.1. doi : 10.103 8/s41467-025-66666-z .Esser, S. K., Appuswamy, R., Merolla, P., Arthur, J. V., and Modha, D. S. (2015). “Backpropagation for Energy-Efficient Neuromorphic Computing”. In: 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems . Vol. 28. Curran Associates, Inc. url : https : //proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2015 / file / 10a5ab2db37feedfdeaab192ead4ac0e -Paper.pdf .Fee, M. S. and Goldberg, J. H. (Dec. 2011). “A hypothesis for basal ganglia-dependent reinforcement learning in the songbird”. In: Neuroscience 198, pp. 152–170. doi :

10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.09.069 .Feldman, H. and Friston, K. J. (2010). “Attention, Un-certainty, and Free-Energy”. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 4. doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215 .Frémaux, N. and Gerstner, W. (Jan. 2016). “Neuromodu-lated Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity, and Theory of Three-Factor Learning Rules”. In: Frontiers in Neu-ral Circuits 9. doi : 10.3389/fncir.2015.00085 .Froemke, R. C., Tsay, I. A., Raad, M., Long, J. D., and Dan, Y. (Mar. 2006). “Contribution of Individual Spikes in Burst-Induced Long-Term Synaptic Modifi-cation”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 95.3, pp. 1620– 1629. doi : 10.1152/jn.00910.2005 .Fuhrmann, G., Markram, H., and Tsodyks, M. (Aug. 2002). “Spike Frequency Adaptation and Neocorti-cal Rhythms”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 88.2, pp. 761–770. doi : 10.1152/jn.2002.88.2.761 .Fukushima, K. (Apr. 1980). “Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position”. In: Biological Cybernetics 36.4, pp. 193–202. doi :

10.1007/bf00344251 .Gadagkar, V., Puzerey, P. A., Chen, R., Baird-Daniel, E., Farhang, A. R., and Goldberg, J. H. (Dec. 2016). “Dopamine neurons encode performance error in singing birds”. In: Science 354.6317, pp. 1278–1282. 

doi : 10.1126/science.aah6837 .Galloni, A. R., Peddada, A., Chennawar, Y., and Milstein, A. D. (Apr. 2026). “Cellular and subcellular special-ization enables biology-constrained deep learning”. In: 

Cell Rep. 45.4. doi : 10.1016/j.celrep.2026.117159 .Gerstner, W., Lehmann, M., Liakoni, V., Corneil, D., and Brea, J. (July 2018). “Eligibility Traces and Plasticity 23 on Behavioral Time Scales: Experimental Support of NeoHebbian Three-Factor Learning Rules”. In: Fron-tiers in Neural Circuits 12. doi : 10 . 3389 / fncir . 2018.00053 .Gidon, A., Zolnik, T. A., Fidzinski, P., Bolduan, F., Pa-poutsi, A., Poirazi, P., Holtkamp, M., Vida, I., and Larkum, M. E. (Jan. 2020). “Dendritic Action Poten-tials and Computation in Human Layer 2/3 Cortical Neurons”. In: Science 367.6473, pp. 83–87. doi : 10 . 1126/science.aax6239 .Gierlich, T., Baumbach, A., Kungl, A. F., Max, K., and Petrovici, M. A. (July 2026). “Spike-based alignment learning solves the weight transport problem”. In: Na-ture Communications . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 026 -74460-8 .Gillon, C. J., Pina, J. E., Lecoq, J. A., Ahmed, R., Billeh, Y. N., Caldejon, S., Groblewski, P., Henley, T. M., Kato, I., Lee, E., et al. (Jan. 2024). “Re-sponses to Pattern-Violating Visual Stimuli Evolve Differently Over Days in Somata and Distal Apical Dendrites”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 44.5. doi :

10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1009-23.2023 .Gilra, A. and Gerstner, W. (Nov. 2017). “Predicting Non-Linear Dynamics by Stable Local Learning in a Recur-rent Spiking Neural Network”. In: eLife 6, e28295. doi :

10.7554/eLife.28295 .Gobes, S. M. H. and Bolhuis, J. J. (May 2007). “Bird-song Memory: A Neural Dissociation between Song Recognition and Production”. In: Current Biology 17.9, pp. 789–793. doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2007.03.059 .Göltz, J., Kriener, L., Baumbach, A., Billaudelle, S., Bre-itwieser, O., Cramer, B., Dold, D., Kungl, Á. F., Senn, W., Schemmel, J., et al. (Sept. 2021). “Fast and energy-efficient neuromorphic deep learning with first-spike times”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 3.9, pp. 823– 835. doi : 10.1038/s42256-021-00388-x .Göltz, J., Weber, J., Kriener, L., Billaudelle, S., Lake, P., Schemmel, J., Payvand, M., and Petrovici, M. A. (Sept. 2025). “DelGrad: Exact Event-Based Gradients for Training Delays and Weights on Spiking Neuromor-phic Hardware”. In: Nature Communications 16.1. doi :

10.1038/s41467-025-63120-y .Gould, S. J. and Lewontin, R. C. (Sept. 1979). “The span-drels of San Marco and the Panglossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationist programme”. In: Proceed-ings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biolog-ical Sciences 205.1161, pp. 581–598. doi : 10 . 1098 / rspb.1979.0086 .Granier, A., Petrovici, M. A., Senn, W., and Wilmes, K. A. (Sept. 2024). “Confidence and Second-Order Errors in Cortical Circuits”. In: PNAS Nexus 3.9, pgae404. doi :

10.1093/pnasnexus/pgae404 .Graupner, M. and Brunel, N. (2005). “STDP in a bistable synapse model based on CaMKII and associated sig-naling pathways”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 

preprint.2007, e221. doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 0030221.eor .Graupner, M. and Brunel, N. (Feb. 2012). “Calcium-based plasticity model explains sensitivity of synaptic changes to spike pattern, rate, and dendritic loca-tion”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109.10, pp. 3991–3996. doi : 10.1073/pnas. 1109359109 .Greedy, W., Zhu, H. W., Pemberton, J., Mellor, J., and Ponte Costa, R. (2022). “Single-phase deep learning in cortico-cortical networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 35. Curran As-sociates, Inc., pp. 24213–24225. url : https : / / proc eedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2022 / file/99088dffd5eab0babebcda4bc58bbcea- Paper-Conference.pdf .Grossberg, S. (Jan. 1987). “Competitive learning: From interactive activation to adaptive resonance”. In: Cog-nitive science 11.1, pp. 23–63. doi : 10.1016/s0364-0213(87)80025-3 .Guerguiev, J., Kording, K. P., and Richards, B. A. (2019). 

Spike-based causal inference for weight alignment . url :

https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01689 . arXiv: 1910. 01689 [q-bio.NC] .Guerguiev, J., Lillicrap, T. P., and Richards, B. A. (Dec. 2017). “Towards Deep Learning with Segregated Den-drites”. In: eLife 6, e22901. doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 22901 .Gütig, R. (Mar. 2016). “Spiking neurons can discover pre-dictive features by aggregate-label learning”. In: Sci-ence 351.6277. doi : 10.1126/science.aab4113 .Hahnloser, R. H. R. and Kotowicz, A. (June 2010). “Audi-tory representations and memory in birdsong learning”. In: Current Opinion in Neurobiology 20.3, pp. 332–339. 

doi : 10.1016/j.conb.2010.02.011 .Haider, P., Ellenberger, B., Kriener, L., Jordan, J., Senn, W., and Petrovici, M. A. (2021). “Latent Equilib-rium: A Unified Learning Theory for Arbitrarily Fast Computation with Arbitrarily Slow Neurons”. In: 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Vol. 34. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 17839–17851. 

url : https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2021 / hash / 94cdbdb84e8e1de8a725fa2ed61498a4 -Abstract.html .Häusser, M. and Mel, B. W. (June 2003). “Dendrites: bug or feature?” In: Current Opinion in Neurobiology 13.3, pp. 372–383. doi : 10.1016/s0959-4388(03)00075-8 .Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior . New York: Wiley & Sons. Hertäg, L., Wilmes, K. A., and Clopath, C. (Mar. 2025). “Uncertainty estimation with prediction-error circuits”. In: Nature Communications 16.1. doi : 10.1038/s414 67-025-58311-6 .Hinton, G. E. and Sejnowski, T. J. (1986). “Learning and Relearning in Boltzmann Machines”. In: Parallel Dis-tributed Processing . The MIT Press. doi : 10 . 7551 / mitpress/5236.003.0011 .Hinton, G. E. (Aug. 2002). “Training Products of Ex-perts by Minimizing Contrastive Divergence”. In: Neu-

24 ral Computation 14.8, pp. 1771–1800. doi : 10.1162/ 089976602760128018 .Hopfield, J. J. (Apr. 1982). “Neural Networks and Physi-cal Systems with Emergent Collective Computational Abilities.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 79.8, pp. 2554–2558. doi : 10.1073/pnas.79. 8.2554 .Hoppa, M. B., Gouzer, G., Armbruster, M., and Ryan, T. A. (Nov. 2014). “Control and Plasticity of the Presy-naptic Action Potential Waveform at Small CNS Nerve Terminals”. In: Neuron 84.4, pp. 778–789. doi : 10 . 1016/j.neuron.2014.09.038 .Hubel, D. H. and Wiesel, T. N. (Oct. 1959). “Receptive fields of single neurones in the cat’s striate cortex”. In: The Journal of Physiology 148.3, pp. 574–591. doi :

10.1113/jphysiol.1959.sp006308 .Hubel, D. H. and Wiesel, T. N. (Jan. 1962). “Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex”. In: The Journal of Physi-ology 160.1, pp. 106–154. doi : 10 . 1113 / jphysiol . 1962.sp006837 .International Energy Agency (2025). Energy and AI .Paris. url : https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-and-ai .Isomura, T. and Toyoizumi, T. (June 2016). “A Local Learning Rule for Independent Component Analysis”. In: Scientific Reports 6.1. doi : 10.1038/srep28073 .Jimenez Rezende, D. and Gerstner, W. (Apr. 2014). “Stochastic variational learning in recurrent spiking networks”. In: Frontiers in Computational Neuro-science 8. doi : 10.3389/fncom.2014.00038 .Jordan, J., Sacramento, J., Wybo, W. A. M., Petrovici, M. A., and Senn, W. (June 2024). “Conductance-Based Dendrites Perform Bayes-optimal Cue Integration”. In: 

PLOS Computational Biology 20.6. doi : 10.1371/jou rnal.pcbi.1012047 .Jordan, R. and Keller, G. B. (Dec. 2020). “Opposing In-fluence of Top-down and Bottom-up Input on Excita-tory Layer 2/3 Neurons in Mouse Primary Visual Cor-tex”. In: Neuron 108.6, 1194–1206.e5. doi : 10.1016/ j.neuron.2020.09.024 .Jouppi, N., Kurian, G., Li, S., Ma, P., Nagarajan, R., Nai, L., Patil, N., Subramanian, S., Swing, A., Towles, B., et al. (June 2023). “TPU v4: An Optically Reconfigurable Supercomputer for Machine Learning with Hardware Support for Embeddings”. In: Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer Archi-tecture . ISCA ’23. ACM, pp. 1–14. doi : 10 . 1145 / 3579371.3589350 .Kaiser, J., Billaudelle, S., Müller, E., Tetzlaff, C., Schem-mel, J., and Schmitt, S. (May 2022). “Emulating Den-dritic Computing Paradigms on Analog Neuromorphic Hardware”. In: Neuroscience 489, pp. 290–300. doi :

10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.08.013 .Kampa, B. M., Letzkus, J. J., and Stuart, G. J. (June 2006). “Requirement of dendritic calcium spikes for in-duction of spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity”. In: The Journal of Physiology 574.1, pp. 283–290. doi :

10.1113/jphysiol.2006.111062 .Kao, M. H., Doupe, A. J., and Brainard, M. S. (Feb. 2005). “Contributions of an avian basal ganglia–forebrain cir-cuit to real-time modulation of song”. In: Nature 

433.7026, pp. 638–643. doi : 10.1038/nature03127 .Keller, G. B. and Mrsic-Flogel, T. D. (Oct. 2018). “Predic-tive Processing: A Canonical Cortical Computation”. In: Neuron 100.2, pp. 424–435. doi : 10.1016/j.neur on.2018.10.003 .Kelley, H. J. (Oct. 1960). “Gradient Theory of Optimal Flight Paths”. In: ARS Journal 30.10, pp. 947–954. 

doi : 10.2514/8.5282 .Kesner, R. P. (2013). “A process analysis of the CA3 sub-region of the hippocampus”. In: Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 7. doi : 10.3389/fncel.2013.00078 .Kinnischtzke, A. K., Simons, D. J., and Fanselow, E. E. (Mar. 2013). “Motor Cortex Broadly Engages Excita-tory and Inhibitory Neurons in Somatosensory Barrel Cortex”. In: Cerebral Cortex 24.8, pp. 2237–2248. doi :

10.1093/cercor/bht085 .Kohonen, T. (Nov. 1998). “The Self-Organizing Map”. In: 

Neurocomputing 21.1, pp. 1–6. doi : 10.1016/S0925-2312(98)00030-7 .Kolen, J. F. and Pollack, J. B. (June 1994). “Backpropa-gation without Weight Transport”. In: Proceedings of 1994 IEEE International Conference on Neural Net-works (ICNN’94) . Vol. 3, pp. 1375–1380. doi : 10.110 9/ICNN.1994.374486 .Köndgen, H., Geisler, C., Fusi, S., Wang, X.-J., Lüscher, H.-R., and Giugliano, M. (Sept. 2008). “The Dynamical Response Properties of Neocortical Neurons to Tem-porally Modulated Noisy Inputs In Vitro”. In: Cerebral Cortex 18.9, pp. 2086–2097. doi : 10.1093/cercor/ bhm235 .Konishi, M. (Jan. 1965). “The Role of Auditory Feedback in the Control of Vocalization in the White-Crowned Sparrow”. In: Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 22.7, pp. 770–783. doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1439 - 0310 . 1965 . tb01688.x .Kriener, L., Völk, K., von Hünerbein, B., Benitez, F., Senn, W., and Petrovici, M. A. (Sept. 2024). ELiSe: Efficient Learning of Sequences in Structured Recur-rent Networks . arXiv: 2402 . 16763 . doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv.2402.16763 .Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). “ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems . Vol. 25. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 1097–1105. url : https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2012 / file / c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf .Kung, H. T. and Leiserson, C. E. (Feb. 1978). “Systolic Arrays for (VLSI)”. In: Sparse Matrix 1978 . New York, NY: Society for Industrial & Applied Mathematics. Kuśmierz, Ł., Isomura, T., and Toyoizumi, T. (Oct. 2017). “Learning with three factors: modulating Heb-bian plasticity with errors”. In: Current Opinion in 

25 Neurobiology 46, pp. 170–177. doi : 10.1016/j.conb. 2017.08.020 .Larkum, M. E. (May 2022). “Are Dendrites Conceptually Useful?” In: Neuroscience . Dendritic Contributions to Biological and Artificial Computations 489, pp. 4–14. 

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2022.03.008 .Larkum, M. E., Zhu, J. J., and Sakmann, B. (Mar. 1999). “A New Cellular Mechanism for Coupling Inputs Arriv-ing at Different Cortical Layers”. In: Nature 398.6725, pp. 338–341. doi : 10.1038/18686 .Lassalle, J.-M., Bataille, T., and Halley, H. (May 2000). “Reversible Inactivation of the Hippocampal Mossy Fiber Synapses in Mice Impairs Spatial Learning, but neither Consolidation nor Memory Retrieval, in the Morris Navigation Task”. In: Neurobiology of Learning and Memory 73.3, pp. 243–257. doi :

10.1006/nlme.1999.3931 .LeCun, Y., Boser, B., Denker, J. S., Henderson, D., Howard, R. E., Hubbard, W., and Jackel, L. D. (Dec. 1989). “Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition”. In: Neural Computation 1.4, pp. 541–551. doi : 10.1162/neco.1989.1.4.541 .LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., and Haffner, P. (Nov. 1998). “Gradient-based learning applied to docu-ment recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11, pp. 2278–2324. doi : 10.1109/5.726791 .Lee, D.-H., Zhang, S., Fischer, A., and Bengio, Y. (2015). “Difference target propagation”. In: Joint european conference on machine learning and knowledge discov-ery in databases . Springer International Publishing, pp. 498–515. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-23528-8_31 .Lee, S., Kruglikov, I., Huang, Z. J., Fishell, G., and Rudy, B. (Oct. 2013). “A disinhibitory circuit mediates motor integration in the somatosensory cortex”. In: Nature Neuroscience 16.11, pp. 1662–1670. doi : 10.1038/nn. 3544 .Leiserson, C. E., Thompson, N. C., Emer, J. S., Kuszmaul, B. C., Lampson, B. W., Sanchez, D., and Schardl, T. B. (June 2020). “There’s plenty of room at the Top: What will drive computer performance after Moore’s law?” In: Science 368.6495. doi : 10.1126/science.aam9744 .Letzkus, J. J., Kampa, B. M., and Stuart, G. J. (Oct. 2006). “Learning Rules for Spike Timing-Dependent Plasticity Depend on Dendritic Synapse Location”. In: 

The Journal of Neuroscience 26.41, pp. 10420–10429. 

doi : 10.1523/jneurosci.2650-06.2006 .Liao, Q., Leibo, J., and Poggio, T. (Feb. 2016). “How Im-portant Is Weight Symmetry in Backpropagation?” In: vol. 30. 1. Association for the Advancement of Artifi-cial Intelligence (AAAI). doi : 10.1609/aaai.v30i1. 10279 .Lillicrap, T. P., Cownden, D., Tweed, D. B., and Ak-erman, C. J. (Dec. 2016). “Random Synaptic Feed-back Weights Support Error Backpropagation for Deep Learning”. In: Nature Communications 7.1, p. 13276. 

doi : 10.1038/ncomms13276 .Lillicrap, T. P. and Santoro, A. (Apr. 2019). “Backpropa-gation through Time and the Brain”. In: Current Opin-ion in Neurobiology . Machine Learning, Big Data, and Neuroscience 55, pp. 82–89. doi : 10.1016/j.conb. 2019.01.011 .Lillicrap, T. P., Santoro, A., Marris, L., Akerman, C. J., and Hinton, G. (Apr. 2020). “Backpropagation and the Brain”. In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience 21.6, pp. 335– 346. doi : 10.1038/s41583-020-0277-3 .Linnainmaa, S. (1970). “The representation of the cumula-tive rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expan-sion of the local rounding errors”. MA thesis. University of Helsinki. Lisman, J. E. (Feb. 1999). “Relating Hippocampal Cir-cuitry to Function”. In: Neuron 22.2, pp. 233–242. doi :

10.1016/s0896-6273(00)81085-5 .Liu, G. (Apr. 2004). “Local structural balance and func-tional interaction of excitatory and inhibitory synapses in hippocampal dendrites”. In: Nat. Neurosci. 7.4, pp. 373–379. doi : 10.1038/nn1206 .Lundstrom, B. N., Higgs, M. H., Spain, W. J., and Fairhall, A. L. (Nov. 2008). “Fractional Differentiation by Neo-cortical Pyramidal Neurons”. In: Nature Neuroscience 

11.11, pp. 1335–1342. doi : 10.1038/nn.2212 .Maes, A., Barahona, M., and Clopath, C. (Jan. 2020). “Learning spatiotemporal signals using a recurrent spiking network that discretizes time”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 16.1, pp. 1–26. doi : 10.1371/ journal.pcbi.1007606 .Makino, H. and Komiyama, T. (July 2015). “Learning enhances the relative impact of top-down processing in the visual cortex”. In: Nature Neuroscience 18.8, pp. 1116–1122. doi : 10.1038/nn.4061 .Malenka, R. C., Kauer, J. A., Zucker, R. S., and Nicoll, R. A. (Oct. 1988). “Postsynaptic Calcium Is Sufficient for Potentiation of Hippocampal Synaptic Transmis-sion”. In: Science 242.4875, pp. 81–84. doi : 10.1126/ science.2845577 .Markov, N. T., Vezoli, J., Chameau, P., Falchier, A., Quilo-dran, R., Huissoud, C., Lamy, C., Misery, P., Giroud, P., Ullman, S., et al. (2014). “Anatomy of Hierarchy: Feedforward and Feedback Pathways in Macaque Vi-sual Cortex”. In: Journal of Comparative Neurology 

522.1, pp. 225–259. doi : 10.1002/cne.23458 .Martinetti, L. E., Bonekamp, K. E., Autio, D. M., Kim, H.-H., and Crandall, S. R. (Sept. 2021). “Short-Term Facilitation of Long-Range Corticocortical Synapses Revealed by Selective Optical Stimula-tion”. In: Cerebral Cortex 32.9, pp. 1932–1949. doi :

10.1093/cercor/bhab325 .Maryada, De Luca, C., Rubino, A., Wen, C., Cartiglia, M., Fodorut, I.-I., Payvand, M., and Indiveri, G. (Apr. 2025). A canonical cortical electronic circuit for neu-romorphic intelligence . doi : 10.1101/ 2025.03. 28 . 646019 .Max, K., Jaras, I., Granier, A., Wilmes, K. A., and Petro-vici, M. A. (Apr. 2026). “‘Backpropagation and the brain’ realized in cortical error neuron microcircuits”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 22.4, e1014164. doi :

10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014164 .26 Max, K., Kriener, L., Pineda García, G., Nowotny, T., Jaras, I., Senn, W., and Petrovici, M. A. (June 2024). “Learning Efficient Backprojections across Cortical Hi-erarchies in Real Time”. In: Nature Machine Intelli-gence 6.6, pp. 619–630. doi : 10.1038/s42256- 024-00845-3 .Meulemans, A., Farinha, M. T., Cervera, M. R., Sacra-mento, J., and Grewe, B. F. (July 2022). “Minimiz-ing Control for Credit Assignment with Strong Feed-back”. In: Proceedings of the 39th International Con-ference on Machine Learning . Vol. 162. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, pp. 15458–15483. 

url : https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/meule mans22a.html .Meulemans, A., Tristany Farinha, M., Garcia Ordonez, J., Vilimelis Aceituno, P., Sacramento, J., and Grewe, B. F. (2021). “Credit Assignment in Neural Networks through Deep Feedback Control”. In: Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems . Vol. 34. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 4674–4687. url : https://procee dings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/ 25048eb6a33209cb5a815bff0cf6887c-Paper.pdf .Mikulasch, F. (Nov. 2023). “A Theory of Inference and Learning in Cortex with Spiking Neurons and Den-dritic Error Computation”. Doctoral thesis. doi : 10. 53846/goediss-10168 .Mikulasch, F. A., Rudelt, L., and Priesemann, V. (Dec. 2021). “Local dendritic balance enables learning of ef-ficient representations in networks of spiking neurons”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

118.50. doi : 10.1073/pnas.2021925118 .Mikulasch, F. A., Rudelt, L., Wibral, M., and Priesemann, V. (Jan. 2023). “Where is the error? Hierarchical pre-dictive coding through dendritic error computation”. In: Trends in Neurosciences 46.1, pp. 45–59. doi : 10. 1016/j.tins.2022.09.007 .Miles, R., Tóth, K., Gulyás, A. I., Hájos, N., and Freund, T. F. (Apr. 1996). “Differences between Somatic and Dendritic Inhibition in the Hippocampus”. In: Neuron 

16.4, pp. 815–823. doi : 10 . 1016 / s0896 - 6273(00 ) 80101-4 .Milojkovic, B. A., Radojicic, M. S., Goldman-Rakic, P. S., and Antic, S. D. (June 2004). “Burst generation in rat pyramidal neurones by regenerative potentials elicited in a restricted part of the basilar dendritic tree”. In: 

The Journal of Physiology 558.1, pp. 193–211. doi : 10. 1113/jphysiol.2004.061416 .Moore, J. J., Ravassard, P. M., Ho, D., Acharya, L., Kees, A. L., Vuong, C., and Mehta, M. R. (Mar. 2017). “Dy-namics of cortical dendritic membrane potential and spikes in freely behaving rats”. In: Science 355.6331. 

doi : 10.1126/science.aaj1497 .Moskovitz, T. H., Litwin-Kumar, A., and Abbott, L. F. (2018). Feedback alignment in deep convolutional net-works . url : https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.06488 .arXiv: 1812.06488 [cs.NE] .Muñoz, W., Tremblay, R., Levenstein, D., and Rudy, B. (Mar. 2017). “Layer-specific modulation of neocortical dendritic inhibition during active wakefulness”. In: Sci-ence 355.6328, pp. 954–959. doi : 10.1126/science. aag2599 .Murray, J. M. (May 2019). “Local online learning in re-current networks with random feedback”. In: eLife 8. 

doi : 10.7554/elife.43299 .Najafi, F., Russo, S., and Lecoq, J. (Feb. 2025). “Un-expected events trigger task-independent signaling in VIP and excitatory neurons of mouse visual cortex”. In: iScience 28.2, p. 111728. doi : 10.1016/j.isci. 2024.111728 .Naka, A., Veit, J., Shababo, B., Chance, R. K., Risso, D., Stafford, D., Snyder, B., Egladyous, A., Chu, D., Sridharan, S., et al. (Mar. 2019). “Complemen-tary networks of cortical somatostatin interneu-rons enforce layer specific control”. In: eLife 8. doi :

10.7554/elife.43696 .Naskar, S., Qi, J., Pereira, F., Gerfen, C. R., and Lee, S. (Feb. 2021). “Cell-type-specific recruitment of GABAergic interneurons in the primary somatosen-sory cortex by long-range inputs”. In: Cell Reports 34.8, p. 108774. doi : 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108774 .Naud, R. and Sprekeler, H. (June 2018). “Sparse bursts op-timize information transmission in a multiplexed neu-ral code”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115.27. doi : 10.1073/pnas.1720995115 .Naud, R., Wang, X., Friedenberger, Z., Payeur, A., Shin, J. N., Béïque, J.-C., Richards, B. A., Drüke, M., Larkum, M. E., and Doron, G. (June 2024). “Fast burst fraction transients convey information independent of the firing rate”. In: doi : 10.7554/elife.98290.1 .Nicoll, R. A. and Schmitz, D. (Nov. 2005). “Synaptic plas-ticity at hippocampal mossy fibre synapses”. In: Na-ture Reviews Neuroscience 6.11, pp. 863–876. doi : 10. 1038/nrn1786 .Niell, C. M. and Stryker, M. P. (July 2008). “Highly Selec-tive Receptive Fields in Mouse Visual Cortex”. In: The Journal of Neuroscience 28.30, pp. 7520–7536. doi :

10.1523/jneurosci.0623-08.2008 .Nøkland, A. (2016). “Direct Feedback Alignment Provides Learning in Deep Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 29. Cur-ran Associates, Inc. url : https://proceedings.neu rips.cc/paper_files/paper/2016/file/d490d7b 4576290fa60eb31b5fc917ad1-Paper.pdf .Obara, K., Ebina, T., Terada, S.-I., Uka, T., Komatsu, M., Takaji, M., Watakabe, A., Kobayashi, K., Masamizu, Y., Mizukami, H., et al. (Nov. 2023). “Change detec-tion in the primate auditory cortex through feedback of prediction error signals”. In: Nature Communications 

14.1. doi : 10.1038/s41467-023-42553-3 .Oja, E. (Nov. 1982). “Simplified neuron model as a princi-pal component analyzer”. In: Journal of Mathematical Biology 15.3, pp. 267–273. doi : 10.1007/bf00275687 .Okubo, T. S., Mackevicius, E. L., Payne, H. L., Lynch, G. F., and Fee, M. S. (Nov. 2015). “Growth and split-ting of neural sequences in songbird vocal develop-27 ment”. In: Nature 528.7582, pp. 352–357. doi : 10 . 1038/nature15741 .Okun, M. and Lampl, I. (May 2008). “Instantaneous cor-relation of excitation and inhibition during ongoing and sensory-evoked activities”. In: Nat. Neurosci. 11.5, pp. 535–537. doi : 10.1038/nn.2105 .Ölveczky, B. P., Otchy, T. M., Goldberg, J. H., Aronov, D., and Fee, M. S. (July 2011). “Changes in the neural control of a complex motor sequence during learning”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 106.1, pp. 386–397. doi :

10.1152/jn.00018.2011 .Park, J., Ha, S., Yu, T., Neftci, E., and Cauwen-berghs, G. (Aug. 2023). “A 22-pJ/spike 73-Mspikes/s 130k-compartment neural array transceiver with conductance-based synaptic and membrane dynam-ics”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 17. doi : 10.3389/ fnins.2023.1198306 .Payeur, A., Guerguiev, J., Zenke, F., Richards, B. A., and Naud, R. (July 2021). “Burst-Dependent Synap-tic Plasticity Can Coordinate Learning in Hierarchical Circuits”. In: Nature Neuroscience 24.7, pp. 1010–1019. 

doi : 10.1038/s41593-021-00857-x .Pehle, C., Billaudelle, S., Cramer, B., Kaiser, J., Schreiber, K., Stradmann, Y., Weis, J., Leibfried, A., Müller, E., and Schemmel, J. (Feb. 2022). “The BrainScaleS-2 Ac-celerated Neuromorphic System With Hybrid Plastic-ity”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 16. doi : 10.3389/ fnins.2022.795876 .Petrof, I., Viaene, A. N., and Sherman, S. M. (Apr. 2015). “Properties of the primary somatosensory cortex pro-jection to the primary motor cortex in the mouse”. In: 

Journal of Neurophysiology 113.7, pp. 2400–2407. doi :

10.1152/jn.00949.2014 .Pfister, J.-P. and Gerstner, W. (Sept. 2006). “Triplets of Spikes in a Model of Spike Timing-Dependent Plastic-ity”. In: The Journal of Neuroscience 26.38, pp. 9673– 9682. doi : 10.1523/jneurosci.1425-06.2006 .Pi, H.-J., Hangya, B., Kvitsiani, D., Sanders, J. I., Huang, Z. J., and Kepecs, A. (Oct. 2013). “Cortical interneu-rons that specialize in disinhibitory control”. In: Nature 

503.7477, pp. 521–524. doi : 10.1038/nature12676 .Pineda, F. J. (Nov. 1987). “Generalization of back-propagation to recurrent neural networks”. In: 

Physical Review Letters 59.19, pp. 2229–2232. doi :

10.1103/PhysRevLett.59.2229 .Plesser, H. E. and Gerstner, W. (June 2000). “Escape Rate Models for Noisy Integrate-and-Free Neurons”. In: 

Neurocomputing 32–33, pp. 219–224. doi : 10 . 1016 / S0925-2312(00)00167-3 .Poirazi, P., Brannon, T., and Mel, B. W. (Mar. 2003). “Pyramidal Neuron as Two-Layer Neural Network”. In: 

Neuron 37.6, pp. 989–999. doi : 10.1016/S0896-6273 (03)00149-1 .Polykretis, I., Tang, G., and Michmizos, K. P. (July 2020). “An Astrocyte-Modulated Neuromorphic Central Pat-tern Generator for Hexapod Robot Locomotion on In-tel’s Loihi”. In: International Conference on Neuromor-phic Systems 2020 . ICONS 2020. ACM, pp. 1–9. doi :

10.1145/3407197.3407205 .Pozzorini, C., Naud, R., Mensi, S., and Gerstner, W. (July 2013). “Temporal Whitening by Power-Law Adapta-tion in Neocortical Neurons”. In: Nature Neuroscience 

16.7, pp. 942–948. doi : 10.1038/nn.3431 .Ramezani, H. and Akan, O. B. (July 2018). “Impacts of Spike Shape Variations on Synaptic Communica-tion”. In: IEEE Transactions on NanoBioscience 17.3, pp. 260–271. doi : 10.1109/tnb.2018.2838056 .Rao, R. P. N. and Ballard, D. H. (Jan. 1999). “Predic-tive Coding in the Visual Cortex: A Functional In-terpretation of Some Extra-Classical Receptive-Field Effects”. In: Nature Neuroscience 2.1, pp. 79–87. doi :

10.1038/4580 .Renner, A., Sheldon, F., Zlotnik, A., Tao, L., and Sornborger, A. (Nov. 2024). “The backpropagation algorithm implemented on spiking neuromorphic hardware”. In: Nature Communications 15.1. doi :

10.1038/s41467-024-53827-9 .Richter, O., Wu, C., Whatley, A. M., Köstinger, G., Nielsen, C., Qiao, N., and Indiveri, G. (Jan. 2024). “DYNAP-SE2: a scalable multi-core dynamic neuro-morphic asynchronous spiking neural network proces-sor”. In: Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering 

4.1, p. 014003. doi : 10.1088/2634-4386/ad1cd7 .Rossbroich, J. and Zenke, F. (2023). “Dis-inhibitory neu-ronal circuits can control the sign of synaptic plas-ticity”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 64059– 64082. url : https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2023 / file / ca22641c182b3b 9608634edb4d09bc33-Paper-Conference.pdf .Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (Oct. 1986). “Learning representations by back-propagating errors”. In: Nature 323.6088, pp. 533–536. doi : 10 . 1038/323533a0 .Sacramento, J., Ponte Costa, R., Bengio, Y., and Senn, W. (2018). “Dendritic Cortical Microcircuits Approxi-mate the Backpropagation Algorithm”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 31. Cur-ran Associates, Inc. url : https://proceedings.neu rips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/file/1dc3a89d 0d440ba31729b0ba74b93a33-Paper.pdf .Scellier, B. and Bengio, Y. (May 2017). “Equilibrium Propagation: Bridging the Gap between Energy-Based Models and Backpropagation”. In: Frontiers in Com-putational Neuroscience 11. doi : 10 . 3389 / fncom . 2017.00024 .Schmitt, S., Klähn, J., Bellec, G., Grübl, A., Güt-tler, M., Hartel, A., Hartmann, S., Husmann, D., Husmann, K., Jeltsch, S., et al. (May 2017). “Neu-romorphic Hardware in the Loop: Training a Deep Spiking Network on the BrainScaleS Wafer-Scale System”. In: 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 2227–2234. doi :

10.1109/IJCNN.2017.7966125 .28 Semenova, N., Porte, X., Andreoli, L., Jacquot, M., Larger, L., and Brunner, D. (Oct. 2019). “Fundamental as-pects of noise in analog-hardware neural networks”. In: 

Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Sci-ence 29.10. doi : 10.1063/1.5120824 .Senn, W., Dold, D., Kungl, A. F., Ellenberger, B., Jordan, J., Bengio, Y., Sacramento, J., and Petrovici, M. A. (Dec. 2024). “A neuronal least-action principle for real-time learning in cortical circuits”. In: eLife 12. doi :

10.7554/eLife.89674 .Shai, A. S., Anastassiou, C. A., Larkum, M. E., and Koch, C. (Mar. 2015). “Physiology of Layer 5 Pyramidal Neu-rons in Mouse Primary Visual Cortex: Coincidence De-tection through Bursting”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 11.3, e1004090. doi : 10.1371/journal.pcbi. 1004090 .Sjöström, P. J. and Häusser, M. (July 2006). “A Cooper-ative Switch Determines the Sign of Synaptic Plastic-ity in Distal Dendrites of Neocortical Pyramidal Neu-rons”. In: Neuron 51.2, pp. 227–238. doi : 10.1016/j. neuron.2006.06.017 .Sjöström, P. J., Turrigiano, G. G., and Nelson, S. B. (Dec. 2001). “Rate, Timing, and Cooperativity Jointly De-termine Cortical Synaptic Plasticity”. In: Neuron 32.6, pp. 1149–1164. doi : 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00542-6.Stuck, M., Wang, X., and Naud, R. (Feb. 2025). “A Burst-Dependent Algorithm for Neuromorphic on-chip Learning of Spiking Neural Networks”. In: Neuromor-phic Computing and Engineering 5.1, p. 014010. doi :

10.1088/2634-4386/adb511 .Sussillo, D. and Abbott, L. F. (Aug. 2009). “Generat-ing Coherent Patterns of Activity from Chaotic Neu-ral Networks”. In: Neuron 63.4, pp. 544–557. doi : 10. 1016/j.neuron.2009.07.018 .Thomas, E. R., Haarsma, J., Nicholson, J., Yon, D., Kok, P., and Press, C. (May 2024). “Predictions and errors are distinctly represented across V1 layers”. In: Current Biology 34.10, 2265–2271.e4. doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024.04.036 .Todorov, E. (Dec. 2006). “Optimal Control Theory”. In: 

Bayesian Brain . The MIT Press, pp. 269–298. doi : 10. 7551/mitpress/1535.003.0018 .Uludağ, R. B., Çağdaş, S., İşler, Y. S., Şengör, N. S., and Aktürk, İ. (June 2024). “Bio-realistic neural net-work implementation on Loihi 2 with Izhikevich neu-rons”. In: Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering 

4.2, p. 024013. doi : 10.1088/2634-4386/ad5584 .Urbanczik, R. and Senn, W. (Feb. 2014). “Learning by the Dendritic Prediction of Somatic Spiking”. In: Neuron 

81.3, pp. 521–528. doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.11. 030 .Vlachas, P. R., Pathak, J., Hunt, B. R., Sapsis, T. P., Gir-van, M., Ott, E., and Koumoutsakos, P. (June 2020). “Backpropagation algorithms and Reservoir Comput-ing in Recurrent Neural Networks for the forecasting of complex spatiotemporal dynamics”. In: Neural Net-works 126, pp. 191–217. doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neunet . 2020.02.016 .Von Hünerbein, B., Jordan, J., Oude Lohuis, M., March-esi, P., Olcese, U., Pennartz, C. M. A., Senn, W., and Petrovici, M. A. (Nov. 2025). “Increased Perceptual Reliability Reduces Membrane Potential Variability in Cortical Neurons”. In: The Journal of Neuroscience 

46.1, e1176242025. doi : 10.1523/jneurosci.1176-24.2025 .Wang, Y. and Liu, S.-C. (Sept. 2011). “A Two-Dimensional Configurable Active Silicon Dendritic Neuron Array”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Reg-ular Papers 58.9, pp. 2159–2171. doi : 10.1109/tcsi. 2011.2112570 .Wehr, M. and Zador, A. M. (Nov. 2003). “Balanced inhibi-tion underlies tuning and sharpens spike timing in au-ditory cortex”. In: Nature 426.6965, pp. 442–446. doi :

10.1038/nature02116 .Werbos, P. J. (1982). “Applications of advances in nonlin-ear sensitivity analysis”. In: System Modeling and Op-timization: Proceedings of the 10th IFIP Conference New York City, USA, August 31–September 4, 1981 ,pp. 762–770. Reprinted in P. J. Werbos. “Applications of advances in nonlinear sensitivity analysis”. In: Sys-tem Modeling and Optimization . Springer-Verlag, Sept. 2005, pp. 762–770. doi : 10.1007/bfb0006203 .Werbos, P. J. (Oct. 1990). “Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it”. In: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE 78.10, pp. 1550–1560. doi :

10.1109/5.58337 .Westerberg, J. A., Xiong, Y. S., Sennesh, E., Nejat, H., Ricci, D., Durand, S., Hardcastle, B., Cabasco, H., Bel-ski, H., Bawany, A., et al. (July 2025). Sensory Re-sponses of Visual Cortical Neurons Are Not Prediction Errors . doi : 10.1101/2024.10.02.616378 .Whittington, J. C. R. and Bogacz, R. (May 2017). “An Approximation of the Error Backpropagation Algo-rithm in a Predictive Coding Network with Local Hebbian Synaptic Plasticity”. In: Neural Computation 

29.5, pp. 1229–1262. doi : 10.1162/NECO_a_00949 .Whittington, J. C. R. and Bogacz, R. (Mar. 2019). “The-ories of Error Back-Propagation in the Brain”. In: 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences 23.3, pp. 235–250. doi :

10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.005 .Williams, R. J. and Zipser, D. (June 1989). “A Learn-ing Algorithm for Continually Running Fully Recur-rent Neural Networks”. In: Neural Computation 1.2, pp. 270–280. doi : 10.1162/neco.1989.1.2.270 .Wilmes, K. A., Petrovici, M. A., Sachidhanandam, S., and Senn, W. (June 2025). “Uncertainty-Modulated Pre-diction Errors in Cortical Microcircuits”. In: eLife 13, RP95127. doi : 10.7554/eLife.95127 .Wilmes, K. A., Sprekeler, H., and Schreiber, S. (Mar. 2016). “Inhibition as a Binary Switch for Excitatory Plasticity in Pyramidal Neurons”. In: PLOS Computa-tional Biology 12.3, e1004768. doi : 10.1371/journal. pcbi.1004768 .29 Wright, W. J., Hedrick, N. G., and Komiyama, T. (Apr. 2025). “Distinct synaptic plasticity rules operate across dendritic compartments in vivo during learning”. In: 

Science 388.6744, pp. 322–328. doi : 10.1126/scienc e.ads4706 .Xie, X. and Seung, H. S. (Feb. 2003). “Equivalence of Backpropagation and Contrastive Hebbian Learning in a Layered Network”. In: Neural Computation 15.2, pp. 441–454. doi : 10.1162/089976603762552988 .Yang, S., Deng, B., Wang, J., Li, H., Lu, M., Che, Y., Wei, X., and Loparo, K. A. (Jan. 2020). “Scalable Digital Neuromorphic Architecture for Large-Scale Biophysically Meaningful Neural Network With Multi-Compartment Neurons”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 31.1, pp. 148– 162. doi : 10.1109/tnnls.2019.2899936 .Zmarz, P. and Keller, G. B. (Nov. 2016). “Mismatch Re-ceptive Fields in Mouse Visual Cortex”. In: Neuron 

92.4, pp. 766–772. doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2016 . 09.057 .Zolnik, T. A., Ledderose, J., Toumazou, M., Trimbuch, T., Oram, T., Rosenmund, C., Eickholt, B. J., Sachdev, R. N., and Larkum, M. E. (Mar. 2020). “Layer 6b Is Driven by Intracortical Long-Range Projection Neu-rons”. In: Cell Reports 30.10, 3492–3505.e5. doi : 10. 1016/j.celrep.2020.02.044 .30