Title: The Neural Echo: A Signal Processing Perspective for Understanding Neural Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.04864v1

Published Time: Thu, 06 Aug 2026 01:00:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
To appear in Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Visual Information Processing, Luxembourg, 2026. 

# The Neural Echo: A Signal Processing Perspective for Understanding Neural Networks 

Chongbiao Wang ∗† , Daniel Gaa ∗, Joachim Weickert ∗, Karl Schrader ∗∗Mathematical Image Analysis Group Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Saarland University Campus E1.7, 66041 Saarbr¨ ucken, Germany 

{cwang, gaa, weickert, schrader }@mia.uni-saarland.de 

†Zuse School ELIZA Hochschulstr. 10, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany 

Abstract —We introduce the neural echo as a tool for under-standing the behavior of neural networks. It generalizes the model-based concepts of impulse responses, diffusion echoes, and filter echoes to learning-based methods. It provides local, space-adaptive impulse responses and filter kernels for a neural network, its so-called echoes. These echoes depend on the input image and can be visualized to understand the learned dynamics of the network via an affine mapping. Neural echoes build a bridge from classical signal processing to modern explainable AI. They are very general and can be applied to both image-to-image and classification networks, with convolutional or fully connected structure, of feedforward or recurrent type, including modern transformer networks. Network differentiability is not required. In the differentiable case, neural echoes comprise concepts based on the network Jacobian, such as saliency maps and the analysis of adversarial perturbations, as special instances. As a simple blueprint to explain our framework, we derive neural echoes for the denoising convolutional neural network (DnCNN). Our experiments suggest that this network weights pixels based on their spatial and gray value distances. This not only clarifies its behavior, but also shows that it can reproduce key concepts of classical model-based denoisers such as bilateral filtering. 

Index Terms —Signal Processing, Neural Networks, Impulse Response 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The impulse response of a linear shift-invariant (LSI) filter is a key concept in classical signal processing [17]. It is obtained by applying the filter to an impulse signal and 

C.W. and D.G. contributed equally to this work. C.W. is supported by the Konrad Zuse School of Excellence in Learning and Intelligent Systems (ELIZA) through the DAAD programme “Konrad Zuse Schools of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence”, sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research. We gratefully acknowledge the stimulating research environment of the GRK 2853/1 “Neuroexplicit Models of Language, Vision, and Action” funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Founda-tion) under project number 471607914. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

transparently expresses the action of the LSI filter at every position. Unfortunately, their lack of adaptivity to the signal makes LSI filters unsuitable for more complex filtering tasks. Shift-variant and potentially nonlinear filters are more versa-tile, but their space-adaptive behavior means that no classical impulse response can be formulated for them. In 2001, Dam and Nielsen [3] introduced the diffusion echo . Their source diffusion echo can be seen as a space-variant impulse response for nonlinear diffusion filters. Recently, this concept has been extended to general model-based image processing and com-puter vision filters by Gaa et al. [6], who have established the notion of the filter echo . They show that the action of many common filters can be expressed in terms of a matrix-vector multiplication of the input image with a state transition matrix. Its columns are the space-adaptive source echoes of the filter. Moreover, the rows of the matrix coincide with the definition of the drain echo from [3]. Since these model-based filters rely on compact mathematical formulations, they offer a certain degree of interpretability by design. However, for more sophisticated filters involving e.g. partial differential equations (PDEs) or variational methods, the specific filter effects may not always be obvious from their mathematical formulations alone. The diffusion and filter echoes provide an intuitive visual interpretation of the filter action in terms of a clear signal processing-based concept: a simple linearized characterization via a matrix-vector product. This allows for the comparison of different filters in a maximally transparent way and underlines the usefulness of these echoes. These days, digital image analysis is dominated by learning-based approaches that rely on deep neural networks [7], [13]. However, neural networks are still largely treated as black-box filters. Attempts to understand their inner workings are a hot research topic that has created the field of explainable AI .So far, the filter echo framework has been applied ex-clusively to model-based approaches [6]. Thus, the natural question arises whether a neural network can be reformulated to comply with this framework. This would enable an interpre-arXiv:2608.04864v1 [eess.SP] 5 Aug 2026 tation of neural networks from a signal (or image) processing perspective and thus build a bridge between two important fields: classical signal processing and explainable AI. 

Our Contributions. The present work closes this gap by establishing a generalization of the filter echo framework from model-based approaches to neural networks. To this end, we introduce the neural echo . We show how one can rewrite the inference phase of a neural network such that it fits (a generalization of) the framework in [6] and yields filter echoes. As a blueprint, we present results for image denoising with a well-established neural approach: the DnCNN [30] of Zhang et al. [30]. We do not consider more complex architectures or filter tasks, since all concepts and foundational insights can already be obtained from this simple model. We compare its neural echoes to bilateral filter echoes [1], [21], [25]. This enables a deeper understanding of the neural network and emphasizes its connections to classical image processing. Having shown how neural echoes are obtained for this denoising network, we discuss the framework in its full generality. We sketch how other typical network components can be included. Our framework covers both image-to-image and classification networks, convolutional or fully connected, of feedforward or recurrent type. Transformer networks are also covered, and no differentiability assumptions are required. To establish a bridge to existing explainable AI methods, we show that for differentiable networks, approaches based on the network Jacobian are special instances of our framework. This includes e.g. saliency maps [20] and the analysis of ad-versarial perturbations [19], [24]. It offers an alternative, signal processing-inspired viewpoint on these popular concepts. 

Related Work. Related ideas exist for network visualization, which have been studied mainly for image classification. The so-called saliency maps of Simonyan et al. [20] are built using partial derivatives of output neurons w.r.t. input neurons. Thus, they visualize the influence of changes in pixels in the input image on the classification decision; see also [22], [29]. Network derivatives also play a natural role in adversarial perturbations, where the effect of a change in an input pixel on the classification output is studied [19], [24]. In Section V, we will see that tools based on network derivatives can be regarded as special instances of our neural echo framework. Since we deal with a neural denoising method, we refer to [4] for a review on such approaches. Classical model-based denoising methods have been around for a long time; see Lebrun et al. [12] for an overview and a principled analysis. 

Paper Organization. We start with brief reviews of the filter echo and the DnCNN denoiser in Section II and Section III. In Section IV, we show how to fit such a neural network into the filter echo setting, which allows us to introduce the neural echo. The generality of our approach and its relation to concepts based on the network Jacobian are discussed in Section V. We present a denoising experiment in Section VI and conclude the paper in Section VII. II. A R EVIEW OF THE FILTER ECHO FRAMEWORK 

The filter echo framework has been introduced in [6] as an extension of the diffusion echo [3]. For a discrete input image stacked into a vector f ∈ RN , the framework describes the filter output u ∈ RM by a matrix-vector product with a suitable state transition matrix S ∈ RM ×N :

u = Sf . (1) This is a fairly common formulation in image filtering [14] and subsumes many well-established filters. It is important to note that the matrix S = S(f ) may depend on the input image f . Since its entries can result from nonlinear adaptations of the filter to f , Equation (1) can also cover very complex filters. By writing a highly sophisticated nonlinear filter like it were a specific space-variant linear filter, it offers an intuitive and unified interpretation of various filters. Based on the definition in [3], one distinguishes between a source echo and a drain echo. The source echo can be interpreted as a space-varying impulse response of the filter. As such, the source echo at a location i describes the propagation of a gray value fi through the filtering process. On the other hand, the drain echo is the local filter kernel that tells us from where the gray value information ui at the corresponding location in the filtered image originated. Thus, the source and drain echoes describe the filter from the perspective of the sender and the receiver, respectively. In [6], it is shown that the source echo si at location i

corresponds to the i-th column of the matrix S, while the drain echo di is given by its i-th row. Therefore, we have 

si = S e i , (2) 

di = S⊤ei , (3) where ei is a unit impulse image, which is 1 in pixel i and 0

elsewhere. In general, S is nonsymmetric and the source and drain echoes differ. The sets of drain or source echoes in all pixels contain the full information on the filtering process and, as such, allow to reconstruct the filtered image. It is important to note that the matrix S ∈ RM ×N can be very large. Therefore, it is usually too expensive to explicitly compute and/or store the entire matrix in a naive way. In the examples in [6], this matrix is either sparse and can be directly deduced from the model weights or obtained by (repeatedly) solving linear systems of equations with sparse system matrices. Therefore, in these cases, the matrix S can be applied implicitly without computing the full matrix. We also make use of this idea for our neural echoes. III. A R EVIEW OF THE DNCNN The DnCNN by Zhang et al. [30] is a denoising approach based on residual learning [8]. This means that it learns to predict the noise profile, which is then subtracted from the noisy input image to obtain the clean result. Let {euk, fk} be a discrete training image pair with a clean image euk ∈ RN and a noisy image fk ∈ RN . Then the image 

uk ∈ RN denoised by the DnCNN is given by 

uk = fk − R θ∗ (fk) , (4) f    

> Noisy Input
> Conv + ReLU
> 64
> Conv + BN + ReLU
> 64
> . . .
> Conv + BN + ReLU
> 64
> Conv
> 1
> Rθ∗(f)
> Residual
> +
> −
> +u
> Filtered Output Fig. 1. The DnCNN architecture. Adapted from [30].

where Rθ∗ is the network operator that produces the predicted residual from the noisy input fk. The optimized network parameters θ∗ are obtained by minimizing the mean squared error between clean and denoised images in the training set. Figure 1 shows the complete architecture of the DnCNN. It consists of D ≥ 2 convolutional layers, where all but the final convolution are followed by a ReLU activation function [9], [16]. Furthermore, the inner D − 2 layers also contain a batch normalization (BN) layer [10]. The convolution in the first layer produces 64 feature maps of the same size as the input image. The convolution in each inner layer keeps the number and size of the feature maps constant, while the last layer creates the output residual image from its 64 input feature maps. IV. T HE NEURAL ECHO 

To explain the basics behind the neural echo, we consider a simple proof-of-concept application: denoising of additive Gaussian noise with the DnCNN. For computing the neural echoes, we only need the inference phase of the network. Thus, we assume that the network parameters have already been optimized on some training set and remain fixed. From now on, we refer to the network operator simply as R.To apply the filter echo framework, we need to rewrite the process (4) of producing a denoised image as 

u = S f , (5) with a matrix S ∈ RN ×N that depends on the input image f .We now discuss how individual components of the DnCNN can be written as matrix-vector multiplications. Additive terms, such as biases in convolutional layers or subtraction of the mean in the BN layers, require extra care. Therefore, we begin with a simplified version of the DnCNN without bias terms and BN layers and show how to write it in the form of (5). Afterwards, we extend the filter echo framework so that it also subsumes the full DnCNN. 

A. Simplified DnCNN without Biases and Batch Normalization 

Convolutional Layer. A convolutional layer (without bias) can be written as a matrix-vector multiplication by appropriately arranging the kernel weights across the rows of the filter matrix. The resulting sparse convolution matrix incorporates the boundary conditions. It is applied to the vectorized image to obtain the convolved result. In the case of the DnCNN, which uses a 3 × 3 filter kernel, the resulting matrix has at most nine nonvanishing entries per row. The 64 feature maps of the inner layers of the DnCNN can be stacked into a vector of size 64 N such that the inner convolution matrices have dimension 64 N × 64 N , while the convolution matrices of the first and last layers are of dimension 64 N × N and N × 64 N ,respectively. We denote the convolution matrices by K.

Rectified Linear Unit. The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [9], [16] is an activation function given by ReLU( x) = max (0 , x ).Applying it to every component xi of a vector x comes down to multiplying x with a diagonal matrix R(x) = ( ri,j ). It satisfies ri,i = 1 if xi > 0, and 0 otherwise. 

Filter Echo Formulation of the Simplified Network. To write the entire simplified network as matrix–vector multipli-cation, we concatenate the matrices of its layers. The predicted residual output of a D-layer network for a given input image 

f ∈ RN can be written as 

R(f ) = K(D)R(D−1) K(D−1) · · · R(1) K(1) 

| {z }  

> P(f)

f , (6) where the upper indices of the matrices refer to the layers and where each ReLU matrix depends on its input. The matrix P

is the product of sparse convolution matrices and diagonal ReLU matrices. It depends only on the input image f , since the trained convolution weights are fixed during inference. The denoised image u is obtained by subtracting the pre-dicted residual from the noisy image: 

u = f − R (f ) = ( I − P (f )) 

| {z } 

> S(f)

f . (7) This formulation yields the state transition matrix S ∈

RN ×N , which maps the noisy input to the filtered output. Its columns and rows constitute the echoes that correspond to the action of the network when applied to the specific input image. It is interesting to note that in contrast to echoes of other filters, for example diffusion or inpainting [6], neural echoes are not restricted to being probability distributions and can have arbitrary, potentially negative components. Since the matrices S, K(k), and R(k) can become pro-hibitively large, it is not recommended to explicitly compute or store them. Instead, echoes can be extracted using (2) or (3) and applying the individual matrices through the implementa-tions of the convolution and ReLU layers of a deep learning framework. Since the ReLU activation matrices R(k) depend on the input of the layers, the implementation of the ReLU layer needs to be slightly adapted when computing the echoes. A pseudocode of the algorithm for computing neural source echoes for the simplified network is given in Algorithm 1. For the corresponding drain echoes, we can apply the layers in reverse order and use transposed convolutions. 

B. Full DnCNN 

The full DnCNN [30] also contains bias terms and batch normalization layers. These terms complicate our considera-tions, since additive terms are not covered by the filter echo framework. We explain how to deal with this in the following. Algorithm 1 Neural Source Echo Computation for the Sim-plified Network. 

Input: 

Input image f ∈ RN ,trained simplified DnCNN architecture with D layers, index set J ⊂ { 1, . . . , N } of desired source echo locations. 

Initialization: 

Initialize residual with initial image: r(0) = f . Initialize residual echoes with unit impulses: q(0)  

> i

= ei for i ∈ J.

Compute: 

for k = 1 , . . . , D − 1

1. Apply convolution matrix of current layer to residual and residual echoes to obtain intermediate results: 

er(k) = K(k)r(k−1) , eq(k) 

> i

= K(k)q(k−1)  

> i

for i ∈ J.2. Apply ReLU to intermediate residual results: 

r(k) = R(k)(er(k)) er(k).3. Apply same ReLU to intermediate residual echoes: 

q(k) 

> i

= R(k)(er(k)) eq(k) 

> i

for i ∈ J.

end for 

Apply convolution of output layer: 

r = K(D)r(D−1) and qi = K(D)q(D−1)  

> i

for i ∈ J.Subtract residual from input: u = f − r.Equivalently for echoes: si = ei − qi for i ∈ J.

Output: 

Denoised image u ∈ RN ,source echoes si ∈ RN for i ∈ J.

Bias Term. For an input f ∈ RN to a convolutional layer with weight matrix K ∈ RN ×N and bias vector b ∈ RN , the output u ∈ RN is 

u = Kf + b . (8) To write this as a single matrix-vector multiplication, we use the following matrix extension that is popular e.g. for homogeneous coordinates in geometric computer vision [5]: 

u

1

| {z } 

> bu

=

 K b

0⊤ 1

| {z }

> cK

f

1

| {z } 

> bf

. (9) 

Batch Normalization. In the inference phase, batch normal-ization (BN) [10] affinely transforms the elements of the input vector. The weights of this transformation are fixed based on the statistics of the training set. Although the multiplicative part of the normalization is straightforwardly expressed with a diagonal matrix, the additive part poses the same problem as the bias term in the convolutional layer. Thus, as a remedy, we also introduce an extended matrix formulation of a batch normalization layer and denote it by bB.

Filter Echo Formulation of the Full Network. We can again express the full network by concatenating the extended matrices of all layers. Eventually, the denoised image u ∈ RN

is simply extracted by considering the first N entries of the result bu ∈ RN +1 .To fit the other layers, the extended ReLU matrix reads 

bR =

 R 00⊤ 1



. (10) This allows to express the full DnCNN from Fig. 1 as 

bR(f ) = cK(D) bR(D−1) bB(D−1) cK(D−1) · · · bR(1) cK(1) 

| {z }  

> bP(f)

bf .

(11) By induction it follows that bP (f ) has the structure 

bP =

 P d

0⊤ 1



. (12) This gives 

bR(f ) = bP bf =

 P d

0⊤ 1

  f

1



=

P f 

1



+

d

1



. (13) Thus, the residual r satisfies 

r = P f + d. (14) The matrix P contains the multiplicative components of the layers (i.e. the convolution without bias, the multiplicative part of BN and the ReLU activation). The vector d comprises the additive terms, i.e. the sum of all individual biases, each multiplied by all multiplicative components that follow it. The denoised image is given by 

bu = bf − bR(f ) = 

 bI − bP (f )

| {z } 

> bS(f)

bf , (15) which comes down to 

u = ( I − P )f − d. (16) To compute the echoes of the full DnCNN, we can first compute the echoes of the multiplicative parts analogously to Algorithm 1, but setting all the additive parts of the layers to zero. Finally, we compute the bias echo −d by starting with the bias of the first convolutional layer and applying all subsequent layers including their additive terms. V. N EURAL ECHOES FOR GENERAL NETWORKS 

General Setting. The reason why we have introduced neural echoes for the DnCNN denoiser – a relatively simple image-to-image network – was to explain the foundational ideas with a transparent example. Having mastered these technicalities, it is straightforward to extend neural echoes to a general setting where the size N of the input data f ∈ RN differs from the dimension M of the network output u ∈ RM . In homogeneous coordinates, we obtain 

bu = bS( bf ) bf (17) with an extended state transition matrix bS ∈ R(M +1) ×(N +1) .This has interesting and far-reaching consequences, e.g.:  

> •

It applies not only to image-to-image networks with different input and output dimensions (e.g. for optical flow computations), but also to classification networks. • If bS is the product of individual matrices, they do not have to be quadratic. Thus, they may e.g. represent up-or downscaling operations such as max-pooling [2], [28].  

> •

The setting is not restricted to convolutional networks that share their weights within one layer. We can consider general fully connected networks without weight sharing.  

> •

Even modern architectures such as transformers [26] are covered by our framework. Crucially, self-attention acts as an input-dependent weighting matrix, where the data dynamically dictate the linear combination of values.  

> •

Our framework also incorporates recurrent networks, since they can be unrolled to feedforward ones [15]. Thus, we can cover very general neural network architectures. 

Coverage of Saliency Maps and Adversarial Perturbations. 

Several existing concepts visualize and analyze classification networks via first-order partial derivatives (i.e. the network Jacobian). This includes ideas from explainable AI such as saliency maps [20], [22], [29] and adversarial perturba-tions [19], [24]. Let us now interpret such approaches from our neural echo perspective. Expressing (17) in regular rather than homogeneous coordinates, we obtain an affine transformation 

u = S(f ) f + b (18) that characterizes the network output u ∈ RM for some input data f ∈ RN in terms of the state transition matrix 

S(f ) ∈ RM ×N and a suitable offset vector b ∈ RM .For a differentiable neural network, a Taylor linearization gives the same formula, with S(f ) being the Jacobian of the network; see also [23], [27]. This naturally comprises saliency maps. Since they compute partial derivatives of output neurons w.r.t. input neurons, they rely on neural drain echoes. Furthermore, the identification of S(f ) with the Jacobian implies that the columns of the Jacobian are the source echoes of the network. This takes the perspective of adversarial attacks, where the effect of a change in an input pixel on the classification output is studied [19], [24]. Our discussion shows that for differentiable networks, vi-sualization and analysis tools which involve the network Jacobian can be treated within the neural echo framework. This supplements them with a novel interpretation from a signal processing viewpoint. We would like to stress, however, that our framework is more general: Since it does not require to propagate derivatives through the network, it can also characterize nondifferentiable behavior, both from a sender’s (neural source echo) and a receiver’s (neural drain echo) perspective. VI. D ENOISING EXPERIMENT 

As a proof-of-concept application, we now present a denois-ing experiment. Its purpose is not a comprehensive empirical evaluation, but to illustrate the conceptual utility of neural echoes in a simple and transparent setting. We have trained the DnCNN for additive Gaussian noise with zero mean and standard deviation σ = 15 . Like in [30], we employ 17 network layers. Since we aim to visualize the behavior of the         

> input image DnCNN result DnCNN echo
> bilateral result bilateral echo
> Fig. 2. Comparison of source echoes of the DnCNN and the bilateral filter with optimized parameters ( σs= 12 .5,σt= 43 ) on a noisy synthetic test image. The echoes are scaled such that the maximum absolute value is mapped to 0 or 255 and weights of zero are displayed in gray (127 .5) . The red dot in the filtered images marks the echo location.

network on a foundational level, we use a simplistic binary test image in Figure 2, inspired by the experiments in [6]. Consequently, we also train the network on binary data. We choose the same 400 training images as [30], but binarize the resulting patches with Otsu thresholding [18]. Like in [30], we use a batch size of 128 and crop 1600 × 128 patches of size 40 × 40 that we augment with random rotations to avoid directional bias. We employ the Adam optimizer [11] with a learning rate of 0.001 to train for 60 epochs, during which we exponentially decrease the learning rate with a factor of 0.95 .In Figure 2, we add Gaussian noise with σ = 15 to our test image of size 32 ×32 and range [0 , 255] . We denoise it with the DnCNN and compare to a bilateral filter [1], [21], [25]. The spatial and tonal (i.e. grayscale) standard deviations σs and σt

of its Gaussian weight functions are optimized w.r.t. the mean squared error (MSE). Figure 2 shows an exemplary source echo that visualizes the filter behavior of both methods. We see that the bilateral filter can “jump” to distant seg-ments, if they are tonally similar (i.e. have similar gray values). Moreover, we observe that its Gaussian decay of the spatial weight assigns higher relative weights to closer pixels. The echo of the neural network illustrates that it has also learned the concept of spatial and tonal similarity. This demystifies its behavior and confirms the usefulness of these handcrafted key components of the bilateral filter. Interest-ingly, the DnCNN MSE of 2.08 is substantially lower than the bilateral filter MSE of 15 .46 . Moreover, the DnCNN echo appears to show a stronger tonal adaptation to the data. This indicates how one could improve the explicit bilateral filter model by modifying its tonal weight function. We observe that already such a simple experiment with the neural echo and a model-based filter echo provides valuable insights from which both worlds may benefit. VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 

We have introduced the neural echo as a general concept for analyzing and understanding the filter effect of neural networks. To this end, we have written the action of each network layer as a matrix–vector product with matrix entries that may even subsume the outcome of nonlinear mappings, e.g. by activation functions. To also incorporate affine transfor-mations caused by bias terms or batch normalizations, we have supplemented our setting with extended matrix formulations. Only for didactic reasons, we have explained our framework for a relatively simple denoising network [30] and restricted our experimental comparisons to the classical bilateral fil-ter [1], [21], [25]. However, we also saw that derivative-based concepts, such as the popular saliency maps for classification networks [20] or adversarial perturbations [19], [24], are specific instances within our setting. Putting saliency maps on a solid signal processing foundation creates a novel bridge from classical model-based signal and image processing to modern explainable AI. Our neural echo framework is very general and does not require any assumptions on network differentiability. It is equally suited for image-to-image and classification networks. They can be convolutional or fully connected networks, of feedforward or recurrent type. Transformer networks can be analyzed as well. The extended state transition matrix char-acterizes fairly arbitrary network actions both from a sender (input) and a receiver (output) perspective. The fact that neural networks require the extension of the filter framework of Gaa et al. [6] with additive terms creates an interesting byproduct: It also allows the analysis of additional 

model-based approaches that have not been covered in [6]. We believe that establishing such generalizations, connec-tions, and reinterpretations is vital to enable a fruitful exchange of ideas from different fields. This can benefit all sides. In our ongoing work, we are analyzing more sophisticated networks, different image processing tasks, and we are performing more exhaustive comparisons to other model-based approaches. REFERENCES [1] Aurich, V., Weule, J.: Non-linear Gaussian filters performing edge preserving diffusion. In: Sagerer, G., Posch, S., Kummert, F. (eds.) Mustererkennung 1995, pp. 538–545. Springer, Berlin (1995) [2] Boureau, Y., Bach, F., LeCun, Y., Ponce, J.: Learning mid-level features for recognition. In: Proc. 2010 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2559–2566. IEEE Computer Society Press, San Francisco, CA (Jun 2010) [3] Dam, E., Nielsen, M.: Exploring non-linear diffusion: The diffusion echo. In: Kerckhove, M. (ed.) Scale-Space and Morphology in Computer Vision, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2106, pp. 264–272. Springer, Berlin (2001) [4] Elad, M., Kawar, B., Vaksman, G.: Image denoising: The deep learning revolution and beyond — a survey paper. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences 16 (3), 1594–1654 (2023) [5] Fusiello, A.: Computer Vision: Three-dimenional Reconstruction Tech-niques. Spinger, Cham (2024) [6] Gaa, D., Weickert, J., Farag, I., C ¸ ic ¸ek, ¨O.: The filter echo: A general tool for filter visualisation. Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision 

68 , Article No. 18 (May 2026) [7] Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A.: Deep Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (2016) [8] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: Proc. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 770–778. IEEE Computer Society Press, Las Vegas, NV (Jun 2016) [9] Householder, A.S.: A theory of steady-state activity in nerve-fiber net-works: I. Definitions and preliminary lemmas. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 3(2), 63––69 (Jun 1941) [10] Ioffe, S., Szegedy, C.: Batch normalization: accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift. In: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 37. p. 448–456. JMLR.org, Lille, France (2015) [11] Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations. San Diego, CA (May 2015) [12] Lebrun, M., Colom, M., Buades, A., Morel, J.M.: Secrets of image denoising cuisine. Acta Numerica 21 , 475–576 (May 2012) [13] LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G.: Deep learning. Nature 521 (7553), 436–444 (2015) [14] Milanfar, P.: A tour of modern image filtering: New insights and meth-ods, both practical and theoretical. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 

30 (1), 106–128 (2013) [15] Monga, V., Li, Y., Eldar, Y.C.: Algorithm unrolling: Interpretable, effi-cient deep learning for signal and image processing. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 38 (2), 18–44 (Mar 2021) [16] Nair, V., Hinton, G.E.: Rectified linear units improve restricted Boltz-mann machines. In: F¨ urnkranz, J., Joachims, T. (eds.) Proc. 27th International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 807–814. Haifa, Israel (Jun 2010) [17] Oppenheim, A.V., Schafer, R.W., Buck, J.R.: Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, second edn. (1999) [18] Otsu, N.: A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 9(1), 62–66 (1979) [19] Papernot, N., McDaniel, P., Jha, S., Fredrikson, M., Celik, Z.B., Swami, A.: The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings. In: Proc. 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). pp. 372–387. Saarbruecken, Germany (2016) [20] Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A.: Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint 1312.6034v2 (2014) [21] Smith, S.M., Brady, J.M.: SUSAN: A new approach to low-level image processing. International Journal of Computer Vision 23 (1), 45–78 (1997) [22] Springenberg, J.T., Dosovitskiy, A., Brox, T., Riedmiller, M.A.: Striving for simplicity: The all convolutional net. In: Bengio, Y., LeCun, Y. (eds.) 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, Workshop Track Proceedings. San Diego, USA (2015) [23] Srinivas, S., Fleuret, F.: Full-gradient representation for neural network visualization. In: Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA (2019) [24] Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfel-low, I.J., Fergus, R.: Intriguing properties of neural networks. In: Proc. International Conference on Learning Representations. Banff, Canada (Apr 2014) [25] Tomasi, C., Manduchi, R.: Bilateral filtering for gray and color images. In: Proc. Sixth International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 839– 846. Narosa Publishing House, Bombay, India (1998) [26] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. In: Guyon, I., Luxburg, U.V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., Garnett, R. (eds.) Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA (2017) [27] Wang, S., Mohamed, A.R., Caruana, R., Bilmes, J., Plilipose, M., Richardson, M., Geras, K., Urban, G., Aslan, O.: Analysis of deep neural networks with the extended data Jacobian matrix. In: Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48. p. 718–727. JMLR.org, New York, USA (2016) [28] Weng, J., Ahuja, N., Huang, T.S.: Cresceptron: a self-organizing neural network which grows adaptively. In: Proc. 1992 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. vol. 1, pp. 576–581. Baltimore, MD (Jun 1992) [29] Zeiler, M.D., Fergus, R.: Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In: Fleet, D., Pajdla, T., Schiele, B., Tuytelaars, T. (eds.) Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8689, pp. 818–833. Springer, Cham (2014) [30] Zhang, K., Zuo, W., Chen, Y., Meng, D., Zhang, L.: Beyond a Gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep CNN for image denoising. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 26 (7), 3142–3155 (2017)