Title: Interplay between Excitability and Noise in Analog Spiking Neurons

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.06720v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 03:27:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Interplay between Excitability and Noise in Analog Spiking Neurons 

Léopold Van Brandt, Alon Ascoli, Michele Bonnin, Grégoire Brandsteert, Denis Flandre and Jean-Charles Delvenne 

Abstract — A spiking neuron is a dynamical system exhibiting a limit cycle (a spike) when subject to sufficiently excitatory in-put. Famous neuroscience experiments by Bryant and Segundo as well as Mainen and Sejnowski revealed that the spike times of some biological neurons are more reliable when subject to time-varying stimuli compared to constant ones. Provided with an industrial physics-based transient noise SPICE simulation framework compatible with foundry transistor compact models, we have demonstrated similar behaviours for a CMOS analog spiking neuron designed for neuromorphic computing hard-ware platforms. Under constant excitation current, the neuron operates in oscillatory regime and the empirical periods (inter-spike intervals) suffer from accumulated phase noise (jitter) during successive cycles, mainly due to the thermal noise of transistors. A time-varying input is reported to be capable of triggering output spikes according to a controlled state-transition mechanism, thereby significantly reducing the spike time jitter in the excitability regime. The physical limitation of the oscillatory or rate-coding regime in terms of reliability-dissipation tradeoff is further evidenced by a stochastic thermo-dynamic uncertainty relation, a theorem that applies to general overdamped dissipative stochastic dynamical systems. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Spike -based neuromorphic computing builds on an infor-mation theory where the data are encoded on the timing of events rather than on amplitude of signals (currents and voltages) [1]. Major promises include energy efficiency and robustness against the non-idealities of the electronic devices, notably the intrinsic noise. The spiking neurons are key cir-cuit building blocks and can be implemented either in CMOS technology [2]–[4] or with volatile memristors [5], [6]. The ultra-low-power (ULP) neuron architecture of [4] (Figure 1) will be studied in this work since it is representative of more complex neurons like the adaptive exponential (AdEx) leaky integrate-and-fire cells [2] integrated in state-of-the-art neuromorphic processors [7]. In a recent paper [8], we analysed the spiking mechanism and studied the excitability property of the neuron, from the purely deterministic point of view, ignoring the intrinsic   

> Léopold Van Brandt, Grégoire Brandsteert, Denis Flandre and Jean-Charles Delvenne are with the ICTEAM Institute, UCLouvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium

leopold.vanbrandt@uclouvain.be 

> Alon Ascoli and Michele Bonnin are with the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy Jean-Charles Delvenne is also a FY2025 JSPS fellow and Invited Pro-fessor at the Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan This research was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon AG research and innovation program (ERC-Synergy, SWIMS, 101119062), the Research Projects “Thermody-namics of Circuits for Computation” and “Stochastic Modelling of Present and Future Nonlinear Dynamical Electronic Devices and Circuits” of the F.R.S.-FNRS, and the SIDDARTA Concerted Research Action (ARC) of the Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles (Belgium).

•vm

iex 

Cm

Inv 1 Inv 2 

•

vGNA 

•

vGK 

MP NA 

MN K

••

CK

VDD 

Fig. 1: Diagram of an ultra-low-power CMOS analog spiking neuron based on a simplified Morris-Lecar model [4]. The input is the excitatory current iex , while the output is the node voltage vGK .noise. One goal of the present paper is to assess the effect of noise on the spike times, for different input signals, through 

transient noise simulations (NOISETRAN ) performed with an industrial SPICE tool [9], [10]. The CMOS neuron design in 65 nm technology and all the deterministic parameters of the model of [4] (Figure 1) are retained, especially the tran-sistor dimensions and the supply voltage VDD = 200 mV . By introducing the physical random noise intrinsic to the circuit, we will notably demonstrate behaviours similar to biological neurons as reported by [11], [12]. The work [13] replicated these neuroscience experiments for an artificial neuron made of discrete components on a circuit board but did not quantify the spike time uncertainty. We report a few older works assessing the interplay between nonlinear neuronal dynamics and noise [14], [15]. They are theoretical in the sense that they rely on simplified mathematical models of the neuron, irrespective of the actual complexity of its physical implementations. Moreover, in this framework, the noise is usually added as a white Gaussian process of fixed predefined intensity to the differential equa-tions governing the neuronal dynamics. This overlooks the state dependency of white noise sources in nonlinear elec-tronic devices [16] such as the MOS transistors in the circuit of Figure 1. In this regard, we believe that a more data-driven analysis, which would rely on industrial component models and circuit simulation tools, is an important contribution, which is currently missing in the literature The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Given their arXiv:2610.06720v1 [q-bio.NC] 5 Oct 2026 Fig. 2: Reliability of spike timing in a rat neocortical neuron stimulated by (A) a constant supra-threshold current pulse; (B) a time-varying current (frozen filtered white Gaussian noise added to a constant component). Raster plots of the spike times for 25 consecutive trials are depicted at the bottom, for both experiments. Reprinted from [12] with permission from the AAAS. major influence on this work, Mainen and Sejnowski [12]’s experiments are revisited in Section II. Relying on rigorous transient noise simulations, we study the spike time relia-bility of the CMOS analog spiking neuron under different excitatory stimuli in Section III. We compare the results, acquired while exploring the neuron spiking behaviour in different regimes, in terms of timing variability in Section IV. Section V draws the conclusions and opens perspectives for future work. II. S PIKE TIMING IN BIOLOGICAL NEURONS :NEUROSCIENCE EXPERIMENTS 

Mainen and Sejnowski [12] recorded the responses of a single rat neocortical neuron subject to an excitation current injected in vitro , as reproduced in Figure 2. They reproduced Bryant and Segundo [11] pioneer experiment, who studied the responses of Aplysia (marine gastropod mollusk) neurons. We distinguish between two configura-tions corresponding to two different stimuli: (A) a constant current pulse of relatively large amplitude; (B) a time-varying current, which is the sum of a constant component and a white Gaussian noise (low-pass filtered so as to faithfully emulate the action of the synapse preceding the neuron). These experiments have been widely replicated since then and are often invoked in the discussions comparing spike rate-encoding theory to event-based information theory for biological brains [17]. The neuron responses were recorded for 25 different trials. In experiment (B), the input white Gaussian noise is said to be frozen, i.e. exactly the same realisation (signal trace) is injected for all the trials. Of course, the intrinsic noise of the biological neuron is unpredictable, and is random from one trial to another. From an experimental point of view, this intrinsic noise manifests itself in the form of spike time uncertainty , which can be easily observed in the raster plot of the spike times (see bottom plot of Figure 2(A)). One goal of these experiments is to gain insight on the reliability of the output spike times, which encode the information, i.e. the trial-to-trial reproducibility against the noise inherent to the system. The two experiments, which differ in the type of stimulus, yield radically different results that reveal two different dynamical regimes for the neuron. In (A), the biological neuron, excited by a constant current pulse of relatively large amplitude, operates above threshold and exhibits a typical self-running (i.e. unregulated) oscilla-tory behaviour : the spike time uncertainty accumulates over time. This uncertainty is conventionally referred to as jitter 

or phase noise in the electronics literature [18], [19]. The oscillator phase error can be modelled as a diffusion process due to the random noise [20], [21], which is inherent to any dissipative system [22], whether biological (as is the case here), electronic, mechanical or of any other kind. In (B), under time-varying stimulus, the spike times are almost perfectly aligned vertically for the 25 repeated trials, except for a few outliers. Unlike experiment (A), there is no phase uncertainty or jitter accumulation over time. This amazing observation suggests substantially different spiking dynamics. In (B), each spike may be regarded as a discrete event presumably resulting from the transition from a stable steady state (in which the neuron operates below threshold and is silent) to a limit cycle, triggered by a temporary positive surge in the input current, before returning to its quiescent state. In the absence of temporary positive contribution of frozen white Gaussian noise to the current, the neuron naturally remains in its silent state. Such mechanism is the signature of an excitable behaviour [23]. Fluctuating or sparse input signals play a resetting role and significantly reduce the spike timing uncertainty. This exper-iment highlights the promise in terms of reliability of the biologically-inspired event-based neuromorphic computing paradigm [1]. III. S PIKE TIMING IN ANALOG SPIKING NEURONS :NUMERICAL INVESTIGATION 

The central theme of this paper is the reproduction of the neuroscience experiments for an artificial analog neuron, such as the CMOS implementation of Figure 1. In this work, we use the same deterministic model and parameters as [4] but extend it to incorporate the intrinsic noise physically generated within the transistors. We rely on computation-intensive time-domain simulations, also referred to as tran-sient noise simulations ( NOISETRAN in SPICE) that are compatible with industrial transistor models. [9], [10]. This framework avoids the need to resort to simplified ana-lytical models and home-made implementations of numerical stochastic simulations that would result in inaccurate and implausible predictions greatly differing from experimental data on silicon. One challenge is to simulate the intrinsic transistor noise in a highly nonlinear circuit. Whilst a detailed simulation methodology was described in dedicated electronics engi-neering publications [9], [10], we summarise the main ingre-dients here. The NOISETRAN tool proceeds schematically as follows: (i) add an individual physical noise source in parallel vGK (t) [mV]          

> 0100 200 // // (a) Output spikes (b) Input excitation current iex (t)
> 020 [pA]
> t[ms]
> Trials
> 125 00.05 0.10 0.15 0.85 0.90 0.95
> // (c) Spike times

Fig. 3: CMOS analog neuron in oscillatory regime under a constant excitation current pulse of supra-threshold ampli-tude 20 pA . (a) Output spikes. (b) Input excitation current 

iex (t). (c) Raster plot of the spike times. Simulation parameters: time step ∆t = 1 ns , intrinsic tran-sistor noise bandwidth fmax = 500 MHz . 1000 trials were performed; only 25 are shown. with each MOS transistor (whose state-dependent intensity is given by the foundry model); (ii) generate random values at each time step for the noise realisations; (iii) perform a conventional time-domain simulation, which essentially consists of numerically solving the nonlinear differential-algebraic equations of the circuit, involving the transistor dynamical model provided by the foundry. This digital twin framework was exploited and validated in the past to study noise-induced stochastic transitions in bistable circuits [24]. A previous work [3] used similar tools to study stochastic resonance in analog spiking circuits. An insightful estimate of the intrinsic noise magnitude can be obtained from the standard deviation of the inte-grated thermal noise on some node voltage at equilibrium, √kT /C [9], where k is Boltzmann’s constant, T = 300 K is the temperature and C is the estimated node capacitance en-compassing the intrinsic transistor capacitances. Even though the spiking neuron operates out of equilibrium over a whole cycle, this still provides an order of magnitude. The effective membrane capacitance extracted in [8] then gives a standard deviation of about 0.7 mV while vm varies from 0 to almost 

200 mV in spiking operation. The intrinsic noise thus results in typical fluctuations just below 1 % .

A. Neuron in the Oscillatory Regime 

In a recent work [8], we numerically investigated the excitability property of the spiking neuron of Figure 1 from an input-output characterisation, in the absence of intrin-sic noise. Cold initial conditions are assumed, specifically 

(vm(0) , v GNA (0) , v GK (0)) = (0 V , 0 V , 0 V) i.e. there is no initial residual charge in the circuit of Figure 1. Inspired by [25], [26], we swept the amplitude and duration pa-rameters of an input current pulse and measured for each case the output neuronal response, which can be reduced to the Boolean discrete event ‘spike or not?’. In particular,       

> vGK (t) [mV]
> 0100 200
> (a) Output spikes
> [pA] 20 0
> −20
> (b) Input excitation current iex (t)
> t[ms]
> Trials
> 1125 00.20.40.60.8
> (c) Spike times

Fig. 4: CMOS analog neuron excited by frozen filtered white Gaussian noise, fluctuation around a constant current pulse of sub-threshold amplitude 5 pA . Input noise parameters: standard deviation σiex = 20 pA , filter time constant τ =5 μs. (a) Output spikes. (b) Input excitation current iex (t). (c) Raster plot of the spike times. Same simulation parameters as in Figure 3. the obtained map ([8, Figure 2(a)]) tells us which pulse amplitude/duration combinations can lead to a spike. For the design of [4] We depict in Figure 3 the results of transient noise simu-lations of the neuron excited above threshold by a constant current iex (t) = 20 pA (Figure 3(b)). Following [12]’s ex-periments, 25 repeated numerical trials were performed. This sustained input current yields an action potential train, i.e. an output spike train on node vGK (all trials are superimposed in Figure 3(a)). The mean spike period or inter-spike interval is found to be about 32 μs. Such high spike rate compared to biological neurons operating in the ms range is due the small 

RC time constant of CMOS analog neurons [2], especially for ULP implementations using small capacitances. In the configuration of Figure 3, the neuron actually behaves like an oscillator, exactly like the rat neocortical neuron in Figure 2(A). We can indeed observe an increase in spike time uncertainty as the variability of successive spike edges in Figure 3(a). To quantify this effect, we have defined the successive spike times T1, T2,..., Tn (n reaching 30 for the 1 ms simulation) as the times at which vGK crosses half of the supply voltage VDD /2 = 100 mV on its rising edge. We have extracted them for each trial, as shown in the raster plot in Figure 3(c). The time axis was broken to clearly highlight that the spike time variability or jitter increases with the spike number. All in all, Figure 3 is precisely the counterpart of the neuroscience experiment (A) for the CMOS neuron in oscillatory regime. The jitter accumulation will be quantified and analysed in Section IV. 

B. Neuron Excited by a Time-Varying Input 

We are now interested in the configuration where the neuron is excited by a time-varying input current whose constant (DC) component is below the excitability threshold of 7 pA . In an attempt to replicate [12]’s experiment (B), we have generated and injected a frozen filtered white Gaussian noise signal. The constant component of 5 pA is on its own, as desired, insufficient to trigger the spiking mechanism that requires the contribution of the input fluctuations as well as, possibly, of the intrinsic noise of the circuit. To emulate the low-pass filtering effect of the synapse that would provide the excitation current, an ideal (yet band-limited by the time step given in the caption of Figure 3) white Gaussian noise signal was convoluted with the impulse response indicated by [12]: 

h(t) = 1

τ 2 t exp 

(

− tτ

)

, (1) in which the filter time constant τ = 5 μs was chosen relatively to the time scale of the CMOS neuron to obtain a signal pattern similar to [12]. The standard deviation of 

iex (t) is σiex = 20 pA . We further emphasise that the input 

iex (t) (Figure 4(b)) is said to be ‘frozen’ in the sense that exactly the same realisation is injected into the circuit of Figure 1 for all simulation trials. Although it was built with a random procedure, the input can therefore be seen as a deterministic time-varying signal and is identical from one trial to another. We depict in Figure 4 the results of transient noise simu-lations. Like in [12]’s experiment of Figure 2(B), the firing pattern of Figure 4(a) is irregular since an output spike is only produced when the input current fluctuations are sufficient to induce an above-threshold response [1]. The neuron operates in the excitability regime and does not behave like a self-running oscillator any more. As a consequence, the spike timing does not suffer from accumulated jitter as can be noticed in Figure 4(c): almost all the spike times are closely aligned vertically along the 25 trials. Overall, Figure 4 is precisely the counterpart of the neuroscience experiment (B) for the CMOS neuron in the excitability regime. We notice that the 4th and 15th spikes are naturally more prone to timing variability. This observation suggests that the transition of the neuron from resting to spiking state is significantly influenced by the intrinsic noise of the circuit, akin to the stochastic state transitions in bistable memories [10], [24]. The 4th and 15th spikes are the ones affected for the particular time-varying input of Figure 4(b). To a smaller extent, the 2nd and 16th spikes also show greater variability. Because the study of these special mechanisms falls beyond the scope of this paper, the 4th and 15th spikes will be regarded as outliers in the discussion of Section IV. IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The numerical simulations of Section III reproduced the neuroscience experiments by [12] on a CMOS analog spik-ing neuron. In this section, we quantitatively confirm the conclusions on the reliability of spike timing by empirically estimating the variance of the successive spike times. The observed significant spike time variations in the oscillatory regime are highlighted as a physical limitation by a thermo-dynamic uncertainty relation.            

> nth spike
> Var {Tn − T1} [( μs) 2]
> 00246510 15 20 25 30
> Oscillatory regime Figure 3 Accumulated jitter
> (n−1) ·Var {T2−T1}
> Excitability regime Figure 4

Fig. 5: Analysis of the trial-to-trial variability in the spike times for the two types of input current, respectively trigger-ing the oscillatory (Figure 3, with mean inter-spike interval or spike period E{Tn − Tn−1} ≈ 32 μs) and excitability (Figure 4) behaviours. The jitter only accumulates over time for the former. The variance was estimated from 1000 trials. As discussed in the text, the variances of the 4th and 15th spike times of Figure 4 are very large ( 20 and 8 ( μs) 2) and go off the scale of the plot. 

A. Jitter Analysis 

In order to break free from the dependence on initial conditions and on the power-up phase of the circuit described in [8], we study the variability in the spike time differences 

from the first spike (denoted T1), that is we study T2 − T1,

T3 − T1, ..., Tn − T1, ... and we then compute Var {Tn − T1}

for n ≥ 2 over all the trials. This quantity is conventionally referred to as n-period (spike time) jitter or accumulated jitter in electronics engineering [19]. To ensure a certain statistical accuracy for the empirical estimator, the variance was estimated from 1000 successive trials (although only 25 

were shown in Figures 3 and 4). The results are summarised in Figure 5. As observed in Figure 3, the jitter accumulates over the time in the oscillatory regime. Moreover, we have verified that, for this specific regime, 

Var {Tn − T1} ≈ (n − 1) · Var {T2 − T1} for n ≥ 2 (2) where Var {T2 − T1} ≈ Var {Tn − Tn−1} is nothing but the 

period jitter , that is the variance of the inter-spike interval. With reference to Figure 5, the very close agreement of (2) (represented by the orange straight line) confirms that the spike time jitter is dominated by white (time-decorrelated) noise sources, corresponding to the thermal noise of the MOS transistors of Figure 1. This could have been anticipated from the knowledge of the circuit bandwidth [10]. The slight deviation of the simulation results from (2) from n ≈ 25 

is likely the signature of time-correlated 1/f noise [18]. While the noise was here generated and simulated in nominal conditions, the large transistor-to-transistor variability in the low-frequency noise magnitude [27] does nevertheless lead us to question the universality of (2). 

B. Thermodynamic Uncertainty Relation 

We now introduce a classic result of stochastic thermody-namic theory that we will apply to the jitter analysis to high-light the physical reliability-dissipation tradeoff. Stochastic thermodynamics aims to extend the laws of conventional thermodynamics to situations in which random fluctuations (due to the intrinsic noise) are not negligible [28], [29]. This theory is especially capable of describing nonlinear sys-tems operating out of equilibrium [30]. Important instances include nanoscale CMOS circuits, either digital gates or memories [31]–[33] or analog circuits exhibiting substantial nonlinearities like the spiking neuron of Figure 1. A key result is the local detailed balance relation [29], [34], which we now state in the specific formulation tailored to our needs. Let a physical system be described by an overdamped time-homogeneous Markov process (in contin-uous time and discrete or continuous space) in interaction with a thermal bath at temperature T . Overdamped here means that the state space encodes even observables of the physical systems, i.e. observables that do not change sign under time reversal — like position or voltage, and unlike speed or electric current that are odd observables changing sign under time reversal. An RC circuit, linear or not, is an example of overdamped system, as are biological neurons. In particular, the dynamics of the neuronal circuit of Figure 1 is overdamped since it is only made of nonlinear dissipative components and capacitances (not only Cm and CK but also the internal capacitances of the transistors modelling their dynamical currents) without including inductors. Let ω be a trajectory of such a system over a time interval [0 , t ].A trajectory consists of an initial state x0, followed by a sequence of (discrete or continuous) time-stamped transitions to other states, until a state xt. This includes discrete state spaces (described by continuous-time Markov chains) and continuous ones (described by stochastic differential equations). Let ω be the time-reversed path, i.e. the reverse sequence of states and transitions between them, starting from xt until x0. Let p(ω) be the conditional probability (or probability density) of trajectory ω occurring knowing the initial state x0. Likewise, p(ω) is the conditional probability (or probability density) of ω, knowing it starts at xt. Let 

Edissip (ω) be the energy dissipated into the heat bath (for instance, the energy dissipated into the resistive components of an RC circuit) by trajectory ω. Then the local detailed balance relation writes [29], [34]: 

p(ω)

p(ω) = exp 

(

− Edissip (ω)

kT 

)

(3) where k is Boltzmann’s constant. This principle applies broadly, in particular for nonlinear systems out of equilib-rium. Similar formulations exist for more general contexts (e.g. in systems with several temperatures, underdamped systems, etc.). It can be seen as a generalisation of detailed balance principle (or reversibility for Markov processes), which occurs when the system is at thermodynamic equi-librium with the bath. It has been used to derive general results relating dynamical and thermodynamic quantities in nanoscale systems. One of them is the thermodynamic uncertainty relation 

(TUR), which we now state. It applies to any odd observable 

f (ω) (i.e. a quantity, associated to the state transitions, that switches sign when the course of time is reversed) which is the result of a sum or an integral calculated across the trajectory. For instance f can be the total charge (integral of current) going through a conductor of an overdamped circuit during the interval [0 , t ], or the total energy dissipated (integral of power) in this circuit over the same time window, etc. Then the TUR states that for overdamped Markov systems with constant parameters at stationarity [35]–[37]: 

Var {f }

E{f }2 ≥ 2kT Edissip 

(4) where Edissip = E{Edissip (ω)} is the expected (i.e. averaged over all the trajectories ω) energy dissipated into the bath over time interval [0 , t ].This important result states that a high precision (low variance for a given mean) on f can only be achieved at the cost of high dissipation Edissip .Let N be the net number of spikes recorded in the circuit of Figure 1 during the time interval [0 , t ], corresponding to the net number of limit cycles followed by the trajectory in the state space of the model (counting as a −1 for each negative spike if the direction of the trajectory is reversed). Let us now normalise it to f = N/t . This odd observable is effectively an empirical frequency for the circuit of Figure 1. Thus the TUR (4) applied to f = N/t indicates that an overdamped Markovian cyclic process, induced by constant external forces, which dissipates little energy cannot be precise, thus exhibiting a large spike time uncertainty (i.e. jitter if regarded as a clock). The expected energy dissipated per cycle in the case of the circuit of Figure 1 is computed as 

Edissip −per −cycle =

ˆ

> one spike cycle

VDD · E{iDD (t)} dt, (5) i.e. by integrating the total instantaneous supplied power (current) over a full spike cycle. We have found it to be 

≈ 1 fJ /spike when the neuron of Figure 1 is excited by a constant current of 20 pA in Figure 3. The energy dissipated into the bath over time interval [0 , t ] is on average, for large 

t:

Edissip = E{N } · Edissip −per −cycle . (6) This therefore implies, for large t (in particular for t → ∞ )a lower bound on the variance of the empirical frequency: 

Var {N/t }

(E{N/t })2 ≥ 2.6 × 10 −10 s

t . (7) The jitter is captured by another quantity in Figure 5, namely by the variance of (Tn − T1). Even though this is not mathematically equivalent to the variance of f = N/t 

as appears in (7), one may still take one as a proxy for the other and compare the respective orders of magnitude. From the data shown in Figure 3 we find 

Var {Tn − T1}

(E{Tn − T1})2 ≈ 2 × 10 −4

n − 1 . (8) The right hand side of (8) is a factor 25 above the fundamental lower bound (4) (up to the approximations being made and taking t = ( n − 1) · 32 μs). The key point is that, irrespective of the particular choice of the circuit parameters for the simulation of Figure 3 (e.g. the current amplitude), the TUR places a fundamental physical limit in terms of reliability-dissipation tradeoff: lowering the minimum achievable jitter necessarily requires a higher dissipation. 

C. Discussion 

In the excitability regime, the jitter remains very low for most of the spikes, and substantially below the jitter of the corresponding spikes when the neuron constantly oscillates. Whilst a detailed study of the neuronal dynamics will be the object of a future work, we presumably attribute this interesting result to the fundamentally different spiking mechanism described at the end of Section II: instead of accumulating phase error during repeated cycles, each spike is a discrete event resulting from a state transition triggered by a time-varying input, whose resetting action drastically reduces the jitter. This preliminary numerical study suggests that a possibly random time-varying input signal could be the solution to an optimal control problem whose objective would be to minimise jitter (as well as the energy con-sumption) in a reliability perspective. We finally mention that the TUR (7) does not apply to this configuration where the spiking is a non-stationary process. In other words, the physical limitations of the oscillatory regime, as imposed by thermodynamics, are alleviated in the excitability regime. V. C ONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 

Relying on an industrial circuit simulation framework, we were able to reproduce famous neuroscience experiments leveraging the excitability of a CMOS leaky integrate-and-fire neuron. The intrinsic transistor noise causes variability in the spike times across different trials, a phenomenon referred to as jitter. When the neuron is excited by a constant supra-threshold current, it exhibits a typical self-running oscilla-tory behaviour with linear accumulation of jitter over time. Such expected and observed behaviour is also supported by a thermodynamic uncertainty relation descending from stochastic thermodynamics that highlights the reliability-dissipation tradeoff in this regime. By contrast, a time-varying input fundamentally modifies the neuron spiking mechanism, whereby each spike results from a controlled transition, which substantially reduces jitter. These rigorous numerical experiments further pinpoint the potential of the biologically-inspired event-based neuromorphic computing paradigm given its assets in terms of noise immunity, in addition to the expected energy saving. In a future work, we will model the neuronal dynamics to validate the assumptions raised on the different spiking mechanisms and to predict the underlying spike time statistics. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

First of all, the authors would like to thank Prof. Rodolphe Sepulchre for bringing the rat experiment from [12] to our attention and for motivating the study of the excitability of CMOS analog spiking neurons. We also thank Prof. Fer-nando Corinto, Prof. Richard Stanley Williams, Prof. Pietro Maris Ferreira, Dr. Martin Lefebvre, Dr. Meik Dörpinghaus and Mr. Alexandre Thyrion for the fruitful discussions and for providing relevant references that allowed us to improve this work and to open perspectives for future research. REFERENCES [1] R. Sepulchre, “Spiking control systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE ,vol. 110, no. 5, pp. 577–589, 2022. [2] E. Chicca, F. Stefanini, C. Bartolozzi, and G. Indiveri, “Neuromor-phic electronic circuits for building autonomous cognitive systems,” 

Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 102, no. 9, pp. 1367–1388, 2014. [3] D. Querlioz and V. Trauchessec, “Stochastic resonance in an analog current-mode neuromorphic circuit,” in 2013 IEEE International Sym-posium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) . IEEE, 2013, pp. 1596–1599. [4] I. Sourikopoulos, S. Hedayat, C. Loyez, F. Danneville, V. Hoel, E. Mercier, and A. Cappy, “A 4-fJ/spike artificial neuron in 65 nm CMOS technology,” Frontiers in neuroscience , vol. 11, p. 123, 2017. [5] A. Ascoli, A. S. Demirkol, I. Messaris, V. Ntinas, D. Prousalis, S. Slesazeck, T. Mikolajick, F. Corinto, M. Bonnin, M. Gilli et al. ,“Edge of chaos theory unveils the first and simplest ever reported Hodgkin–Huxley neuristor,” Advanced Electronic Materials , vol. 11, no. 8, p. 2400789, 2025. [6] R. Zhao, T. Wang, T. Moon, Y. Xu, J. Zhao, P. Sud, S. J. Kim, H.-T. Liao, Y. Zhuo, R. Midya et al. , “A spiking artificial neuron based on one diffusive memristor, one transistor and one resistor,” Nature Electronics , pp. 1–11, 2025. [7] H. Greatorex, O. Richter, M. Mastella, M. Cotteret, P. Klein, M. Fabre, A. Rubino, W. Soares Girão, J. Chen, M. Ziegler et al. , “A neuro-morphic processor with on-chip learning for beyond-CMOS device integration,” Nature communications , vol. 16, no. 1, p. 6424, 2025. [8] L. Van Brandt, G. Brandsteert, and D. Flandre, “On the Excitability of Ultra-Low-Power CMOS Analog Spiking Neurons,” in IEEE LASCAS 2026, Arequipa, Peru , 2026. [9] L. Van Brandt, F. Silveira, J.-C. Delvenne, and D. Flandre, “On Noise-Induced Transient Bit Flips in Subthreshold SRAM,” Solid-State Electronics , vol. 208, p. 108715, 2023. [10] L. Van Brandt, M. Bonnin, M. B. da Silva, P. Bolcato, G. I. Wirth, D. Flandre, and J.-C. Delvenne, “Modeling and Predicting Noise-Induced Failure Rates in Ultra-Low-Voltage SRAM Bitcells Affected by Process Variations,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , 2025. [11] H. L. Bryant and J. P. Segundo, “Spike initiation by transmembrane current: a white-noise analysis.” The Journal of physiology , vol. 260, no. 2, pp. 279–314, 1976. [12] Z. F. Mainen and T. J. Sejnowski, “Reliability of spike timing in neocortical neurons,” Science , vol. 268, no. 5216, pp. 1503–1506, 1995. [13] T. M. Kirby, L. Ribar, and R. Sepulchre, “Reliability of Event Timing in Silicon Neurons,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.14134 , 2021. [14] P. Lánsk` y and R. Rodriguez, “Two-compartment stochastic model of a neuron,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , vol. 132, no. 1-2, pp. 267–286, 1999. [15] T. Shimokawa, K. Pakdaman, and S. Sato, “Time-scale matching in the response of a leaky integrate-and-fire neuron model to periodic stimulus with additive noise,” Physical Review E , vol. 59, no. 3, p. 3427, 1999. [16] M. Bonnin, L. Van Brandt, J.-C. Delvenne, F. L. Traversa, and F. Bonani, “A Thermodynamically Consistent Thermal Equilibrium Gaussian White Noise Model for Nonlinear Resistors,” IEEE Trans-actions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , 2025. [17] R. Brette, “Philosophy of the Spike: Rate-Based vs. Spike-Based Theories of the Brain,” Frontiers in systems neuroscience , vol. 9, p. 151, 2015. [18] A. Hajimiri, S. Limotyrakis, and T. H. Lee, “Jitter and Phase Noise in Ring Oscillators,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 790–804, 2002. [19] N. Da Dalt and A. Sheikholeslami, Understanding jitter and phase noise: A circuits and systems perspective . Cambridge University Press, 2018. [20] M. Bonnin and F. Corinto, “Phase Noise and Noise Induced Frequency Shift in Stochastic Nonlinear Oscillators,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2104–2115, 2013. [21] M. Bonnin, “Amplitude and phase dynamics of noisy oscillators,” 

International Journal of Circuit Theory and Applications , vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 636–659, 2017. [22] J.-C. Delvenne and L. Van Brandt, “Moments of Entropy Production in Dissipative Devices,” Physical Review Letters , vol. 134, no. 23, p. 237101, 2025. [23] E. M. Izhikevich, Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience . MIT press, 2007. [24] L. Van Brandt and J.-C. Delvenne, “Predicting State Transitions in Autonomous Nonlinear Bistable Systems with Hidden Stochasticity,” 

IEEE Control Systems Letters , 2024. [25] R. Sepulchre, G. Drion, and A. Franci, “Excitable behaviors,” in 

Emerging Applications of Control and Systems Theory: A Festschrift in Honor of Mathukumalli Vidyasagar . Springer, 2018, pp. 269–280. [26] R. Sepulchre and G. Tong, “On the threshold of excitable systems: An energy-based perspective,” in 2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2025, pp. 980–985. [27] G. I. Wirth, T. H. Both, M. B. Silva, and L. Van Brandt, “Statistical Modeling of Timing Variability Due to Random Telegraph Noise in Logic Gates,” Fluctuation and Noise Letters , p. 2540022, 2025. [28] L. Peliti and S. Pigolotti, Stochastic Thermodynamics: An Introduction .Princeton University Press, 2021. [29] C. Van den Broeck et al. , “Stochastic thermodynamics: A brief introduction,” Phys. Complex Colloids , vol. 184, pp. 155–193, 2013. [30] R. Rao and M. Esposito, “Nonequilibrium thermodynamics of chem-ical reaction networks: Wisdom from stochastic thermodynamics,” 

Physical Review X , vol. 6, no. 4, p. 041064, 2016. [31] N. Freitas, J.-C. Delvenne, and M. Esposito, “Stochastic Thermody-namics of Nonlinear Electronic Circuits: A Realistic Framework for Computing Around kT,” Physical Review X , vol. 11, no. 3, p. 031064, 2021. [32] L. Van Brandt, D. Flandre, and J.-C. Delvenne, “Stochastic Nonlinear Dynamical Modelling of SRAM Bitcells in Retention Mode,” in 2024 8th IEEE Electron Devices Technology & Manufacturing Conference (EDTM), Bangalore, India . IEEE, 2024, invited talk. [33] L. Van Brandt and J.-C. Delvenne, “Noise-dissipation relation for nonlinear electronic circuits,” Applied Physics Letters , vol. 122, no. 26, 2023. [34] C. Maes, “Local detailed balance,” SciPost Physics Lecture Notes , p. 032, 2021. [35] A. C. Barato and U. Seifert, “Thermodynamic uncertainty relation for biomolecular processes,” Physical review letters , vol. 114, no. 15, p. 158101, 2015. [36] J. M. Horowitz and T. R. Gingrich, “Thermodynamic uncertainty rela-tions constrain non-equilibrium fluctuations,” Nature Physics , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 15–20, 2020. [37] G. Falasco, M. Esposito, and J.-C. Delvenne, “Unifying thermody-namic uncertainty relations,” New Journal of Physics , vol. 22, no. 5, p. 053046, 2020.